Khalifa was twenty-six years old when he met the
merchant Amur Biashara. At the time he was working
for a small private bank owned by two Gujarati
brothers. The Indian-run private banks were the only
ones that had dealings with local merchants and
accommodated themselves to their ways of doing
business. The big banks wanted business run by
paperwork and securities and guarantees, which did not
always suit local merchants who worked on networks
and associations invisible to the naked eye. The brothers
employed Khalifa because he was related to them on his
father’s side. Perhaps related was too strong a word but
his father was from Gujarat too and in some instances
that was relation enough. His mother was a
countrywoman. Khalifa’s father met her when he was
working on the farm of a big Indian landowner, two
days’ journey from the town, where he stayed for most
of his adult life. Khalifa did not look Indian, or not the
kind of Indian they were used to seeing in that part of
the world. His complexion, his hair, his nose, all favoured
his African mother but he loved to announce his lineage
when it suited him. Yes, yes, my father was an Indian.
I don’t look it, hey? He married my mother and stayed
loyal to her. Some Indian men play around with African
women until they are ready to send for an Indian wife
then abandon them. My father never left my mother.
His father’s name was Qassim and he was born in a
small village in Gujarat which had its rich and its poor,
its Hindus and its Muslims and even some Hubshi
Christians. Qassim’s family was Muslim and poor. He
grew up a diligent boy who was used to hardship. He
was sent to a mosque school in his village and then to
a Gujarati-speaking government school in the town near
his home. His own father was a tax collector who
travelled the countryside for his employer, and it was his
idea that Qassim should be sent to school so that he
too could become a tax collector or something similarly
respectable. His father did not live with them. He only
ever came to see them two or three times in a year.
Qassim’s mother looked after her blind mother-in-law as
well as five children. He was the eldest and he had a
younger brother and three sisters. Two of his sisters,
the two youngest, died when they were small. Their
father sent money now and then but they had to look
after themselves in the village and do whatever work
they could find. When Qassim was old enough, his
teachers at the Gujarati-speaking school encouraged him
to sit for a scholarship at an elementary English-medium
school in Bombay, and after that his luck began to
change. His father and other relatives arranged a loan
to allow him to lodge as best he could in Bombay while
he attended the school. In time his situation improved
because he became a lodger with the family of a school
friend, who also helped him to find work as a tutor of
younger children. The few annas he earned there helped
him to support himself.
Soon after he finished school, an offer came for him to
join a landowner’s book-keeping team on the coast of
Africa. It seemed like a blessing, opening a door to a
livelihood for him and perhaps some adventure. The
offer came through the imam of his home village. The
landowner’s antecedents came from the same village in
the distant past, and they always sent for a
book-keeper from there when they needed one. It was
to ensure someone loyal and dependent was looking
after their affairs. Every year during the fasting month
Qassim sent to the imam of his home village a sum of
money, which the landowner kept aside from his wages,
to pass on to his family. He never returned to Gujarat.
That was the story Khalifa’s father told him about his
own struggles as a child. He told him because that is
what fathers do to their children and because he
wanted the boy to want more. He taught him to read
and write in the roman alphabet and to understand the
basics of arithmetic. Then when Khalifa was a little older,
about eleven or so, he sent the boy to a private tutor
in the nearby town who taught him mathematics and
book-keeping and an elementary English vocabulary.
These were ambitions and practices his father had
brought with him from India, but which were unfulfilled in
his own life.
Khalifa was not the tutor’s only student. There were
four of them, all Indian boys. They lodged with their
teacher, sleeping on the floor in the downstairs hallway
under the stairs where they also had their meals. They
were never allowed upstairs. Their classroom was a
small room with mats on the floor and a high barred
window, too high for them to see out although they
could smell the open drain running past the back of the
house. Their tutor kept the room locked after lessons
and treated it as a sacred space, which they must
sweep and dust every morning before lessons began.
They had lessons first thing and then again in the late
afternoon before it became too dark. In the early
afternoon, after his lunch, the tutor always went to
sleep, and they did not have lessons in the evening to
save on candles. In the hours that were their own they
found work in the market or on the shore or else
wandered the streets. Khalifa did not suspect with what
nostalgia he would remember those days in later life.
He started with the tutor the year the Germans
arrived in the town and was with him for five years.
Those were the years of the al Bushiri uprising, during
which Arab and Waswahili coastal and caravan traders
resisted the German claim that they were the rulers of
the land. The Germans and the British and the French
and the Belgians and the Portuguese and the Italians
and whoever else had already had their congress and
drawn their maps and signed their treaties, so this
resistance was neither here nor there. The revolt was
suppressed by Colonel Wissmann and his newly formed
schutztruppe. Three years after the defeat of the al
Bushiri revolt, as Khalifa was completing his period with
the tutor, the Germans were engaged in another war,
this time with the Wahehe a long way in the south.
They too were reluctant to accept German rule and
proved more stubborn than al Bushiri, inflicting
unexpectedly heavy casualties on the schutztruppe who
responded with great determination and ruthlessness.
To his father’s delight, Khalifa turned out to have a
talent for reading and writing and for book-keeping. It
was then, on the tutor’s advice, that Khalifa’s father
wrote to the Gujarati banker brothers who had their
business in the same town. The tutor drafted a letter,
which he gave to Khalifa to take to his father. His father
copied it out in his own hand and gave it to a cart
driver to deliver back to the tutor who took it to the
bankers. They all agreed that the tutor’s endorsement
was certain to help.
Honourable sirs, his father wrote, is there an opening
for my son in your esteemed business? He is a
hard-working boy and a talented if inexperienced
book-keeper who can write in roman and has some
basic English. He will be grateful to you for his entire
life. Your humble brother from Gujarat.
Several months passed before they received a reply,
and only did so because the tutor went round to plead
with the brothers, for the sake of his reputation. When
the letter came it said, Send him here and we will try
him out. If everything goes well, we will offer him work.
Gujarati Musulman must always help each other. If we
don’t look after each other, who will look after us?
Khalifa was eager to leave the family home on the
landowner’s estate where his father was the
book-keeper. During the time they waited for a reply
from the banker brothers, he helped his father with his
work: recording wages, filling in orders, listing expenses
and listening to complaints that he could not remedy.
The estate-work was heavy and the workers’ pay was
meagre. They were often struggling against fevers and
aches and squalor. The workers added to their food
supplies by cultivating the small patch of ground the
estate allowed them. Khalifa’s mother Mariamu did that
too, growing tomatoes, spinach, okra and sweet
potatoes. Her garden was next to their cramped little
house and at times the paltriness of their lives
depressed and bored Khalifa so much that he longed for
the austere time he spent with the tutor. So when the
reply from the banker brothers came, he was ready to
go and determined to make sure that they would retain
him. They did so for eleven years. If they were at first
surprised by his appearance they did not show it, nor
did they ever remark on it to Khalifa although some of
their other Indian clients did. No, no, he is our brother,
Guji just like us, the banker brothers said.
He was just a clerk, entering figures in a ledger and
keeping records up to date. That was all the work they
allowed him to do. He did not think they fully trusted
him with their affairs but that was the way with money
and business. The brothers Hashim and Gulab were
moneylenders, which as they explained to Khalifa is what
all bankers really are. Unlike the big banks, though, they
did not have customers with private accounts. The
brothers were close in age and looked very alike: short
and solidly built, with easily smiling faces, wide
cheekbones and carefully clipped moustaches. A small
number of people, all Gujarati businessmen and
financiers, deposited their surplus money with them and
they lent it out at interest to local merchants and
traders. Every year on the Prophet’s birthday they held
a reading of the maulid in the garden of their mansion
and distributed food to all who came.
Khalifa had been with the brothers for ten years when
Amur Biashara approached him with a proposition. He
already knew Amur Biashara because the merchant had
dealings with the bank. On this occasion, Khalifa helped
him out with some information that the owners did not
know he knew, details about commission and interest
that helped the merchant strike a better deal. Amur
Biashara paid him for the information. He bribed him. It
was only a small bribe, and the advantage Amur
Biashara gained from it was modest, but the merchant
had a cut-throat reputation to maintain and, in any
case, he could not resist anything underhand. For
Khalifa, the modesty of the bribe allowed him to
suppress any feeling of guilt at betraying his employers.
He told himself he was acquiring experience in business,
which was also about knowing its crooked ways.
Some months after Khalifa made his little arrangement
with Amur Biashara, the banker brothers decided to
transfer their business to Mombasa. This was as the
railway from Mombasa to Kisumu was under construction
and the colonial policy of encouraging Europeans to
settle in British East Africa, as they called it at the time,
was approved and launched. The banker brothers
expected better opportunities to be opening up there,
and they were not the only ones among the Indian
merchants and craftsmen. At the same time, Amur
Biashara was expanding his business and he employed
Khalifa as a clerk because he himself could not write in
roman alphabet and Khalifa could. The merchant thought
this knowledge could be useful to him.
The Germans had by then subdued all revolt in their
Deutsch-Ostafrika, or so they thought. They had taken
care of al Bushiri and the protests and resistance of the
caravan traders on the coast. They had suppressed that
rebellion after a struggle, captured al Bushiri and hanged
him in 1888. The schutztruppe, the army of African
mercenaries known as askari under the direction of
Colonel Wissmann and his German officers, was at that
time made up of disbanded Nubi soldiers who had
served the British against the Mahdi in Sudan and
Shangaan ‘Zulu’ recruits from southern Portuguese East
Africa. The German administration made a public
spectacle of al Bushiri’s hanging, as they were to do
with the many other executions they would carry out in
the coming years. As a fitting token of their mission to
bring order and civilisation to these parts, they turned
the fortress in Bagamoyo, which was one of al Bushiri’s
strongholds, into a German command post. Bagamoyo
was also the terminus of the old caravan trade and the
busiest port on that stretch of the coast. Winning and
holding it was an important demonstration of German
control of their colony.
There was still much for them to do, though, and as
they moved inland they encountered many other peoples
who were reluctant to become German subjects: the
Wanyamwezi, Wachagga, Wameru, and most
troublesome of all the Wahehe in the south. They finally
subdued the Wahehe after eight years of war, starving
and crushing and burning out their resistance. In their
triumph, the Germans cut off the head of the Wahehe
leader Mkwawa and sent it to Germany as a trophy.
The schutztruppe askari, aided by local recruits from
among the defeated people, were by then a highly
experienced force of destructive power. They were proud
of their reputation for viciousness, and their officers and
the administrators of Deutsch-Ostafrika loved them to be
just like that. They did not know about the Maji Maji
uprising, which was about to erupt in the south and
west as Khalifa went to work for Amur Biashara, and
which was to turn into the worst rebellion of all and elicit
even greater ferocity from the Germans and their askari
army.
At that time, the German administration was bringing in
new regulations and rules for doing business. Amur
Biashara expected Khalifa would know how to negotiate
for him. He expected him to read the decrees and
reports that the administration issued and to complete
the customs and tax forms that were required.
Otherwise the merchant kept his business to himself. He
was always up to something, so Khalifa was a general
assistant who did whatever was required rather than a
trusted clerk as he had expected. Sometimes the
merchant told him things and sometimes he didn’t.
Khalifa wrote the letters, went to government offices for
this or that licence, collected gossip and information and
took little presents and sweeteners to people the
merchant wanted kept sweet. Even so, he thought the
merchant relied on him and his discretion, as much as
he relied on anyone.
Amur Biashara was not difficult to work for. He was a
small elegant man, always courteous and soft-spoken
and a regular and obliging member of the congregation
at his local mosque. He donated to charitable collections
when a small disaster befell someone and never missed
the funeral of a neighbour. No passing stranger could
have mistaken him for anything but a modest or even
saintly member of the community, but people knew
otherwise and spoke of his cut-throat ways and his
rumoured wealth with admiration. His secretiveness and
ruthlessness in business were thought essential qualities
in a merchant. He ran his business as if it were a plot,
people liked to say. Khalifa thought of him as the pirate,
nothing was too small for him: smuggling, moneylending,
hoarding whatever was scarce as well as the usual stuff,
importing this and that. Whatever was required, he was
willing. He did his business in his head because he did
not trust anyone, and also because some of his deals
had to be discreet. It seemed to Khalifa that it gave the
merchant pleasure to pay bribes and make devious
transactions, that it reassured him when he made a
secret payment for what he desired to happen. His mind
was always calculating, assessing the people he dealt
with. He was outwardly gentle and could be kind when
he wished but Khalifa knew he was capable of real
sternness. After working for him for several years, he
knew how hard the merchant’s heart was.
So Khalifa wrote the letters, paid the bribes and picked
up whatever crumbs of information the merchant cared
to let drop, and he was reasonably content. He had a
flair for gossip, for receiving it and disseminating it, and
the merchant did not rebuke him for spending many
hours in conversation in the streets and cafés rather
than at his desk. It was always better to know what
was being said than to be in the dark. Khalifa would
have preferred to contribute and know more about the
deals but that was not likely to happen. He did not
even know the combination number of the merchant’s
safe. If he needed a document he had to ask the
merchant to get it. Amur Biashara kept a lot of money
in that safe and he never even opened the door fully
when Khalifa or anyone else was in the office. When he
needed something from it, he stood in front of the safe
and shielded the combination wheel with his body as he
turned it. Then he opened the door a few inches and
reached in like a pilferer.
Khalifa had been with Bwana Amur for over three
years when he received word that his mother Mariamu
had suddenly died. She was in her late forties and her
passing was completely unexpected. He hurried home to
be with his father and found him unwell and deeply
distraught. Khalifa was their only child but in recent
times had not seen a great deal of his parents, so it
was with some surprise that he saw how weary and
feeble his father looked. He was ill with something but
had not been able to see a healer who could tell him
what was wrong with him. There was no doctor nearby
and the nearest hospital was in the town where Khalifa
lived on the coast.
‘You should’ve told me. I would’ve come for you,’
Khalifa told him.
His father’s body trembled gently all the time and he
had no strength. He was no longer able to work and
sat on the porch of his two-roomed shack on the
landowner’s estate, staring out blankly all day.
‘It just came on me a few months ago, this
weakness,’ he told Khalifa. ‘I thought I would go first,
but your mother beat me to it. She shut her eyes and
went to sleep and was gone. Now what am I supposed
to do?’
Khalifa stayed with him for four days and knew from
the symptoms that his father was very ill with malaria.
He had a high fever, could not keep food down, his
eyes were jaundiced and he passed red-tinted urine. He
knew from experience that mosquitoes were a hazard
on the estate. When he woke up in the room he
shared with his father, his hands and ears were covered
with bites. On the morning of the fourth day, he woke
up to see his father was still sleeping. Khalifa left him
and went out to the back for a wash and to boil water
for their tea. Then as he stood waiting for the water to
boil he felt a shiver of dread and went back inside to
find that his father was not sleeping but dead. Khalifa
stood for a while looking at him, so thin and shrunken
in death when he had been so vigorous and such a
champion in life. He covered him and went to the estate
office to get help. They took his body to the small
mosque in the village by the estate. There Khalifa
washed him as required by custom, assisted by people
who were familiar with the rituals. Later that afternoon
they buried him in the cemetery behind the mosque. He
donated the few belongings his father and mother left
behind to the imam of the mosque and asked him to
distribute them to whoever might want them.
When he returned to town and for several months
afterwards Khalifa felt alone in the world, an ungrateful
and worthless son. The feeling was unexpected. He had
lived away from his parents for most of his life, the
years with the tutor, then with the banker brothers and
then with the merchant, and had felt no remorse for his
neglect of them. Their sudden passing seemed a
catastrophe, a judgement on him. He was living a
useless life in a town that was not his home, in a
country that seemed to be constantly at war, with
reports of yet another uprising in the south and west.
It was then that Amur Biashara spoke to him.
‘You have been with me now for several years … how
many is it, three … four?’ he said. ‘You have conducted
yourself with efficiency and respect. I appreciate that.’
‘I am grateful,’ Khalifa said, unsure whether he was
about to receive a pay rise or to be dismissed.
‘The passing away of both your parents has been a
sad blow to you, I know that. I have seen how it has
distressed you. May God have mercy on their souls.
Because you have worked for me with such dedication
and humility and for so long, I think it is not
inappropriate for me to offer you some advice,’ the
merchant said.
‘I welcome your advice,’ Khalifa said, beginning to think
that he was not about to be dismissed.
‘You are like a member of my family, and it is my
duty to offer guidance to you. It is time you married
and I think I know a suitable bride. A relative of mine
was recently orphaned. She is a respectful girl and she
has also inherited property. I suggest you ask for her. I
would have married her myself,’ the merchant said with
a smile, ‘if I were not perfectly content as I am. You
have served me well for many years, and this will be a
fitting outcome for you.’
Khalifa knew that the merchant was making him a gift
of her, and that the young woman was not going to
have much say in the matter. He said she was a
respectful girl but from the lips of a hard-headed
merchant those words revealed nothing. Khalifa agreed
to the arrangement because he did not think he could
refuse and because he desired it, even though in his
fearful moments he imagined his bride-to-be as someone
abrasive and demanding with unattractive habits. They
did not meet before the wedding or even at the
wedding. The ceremony was a simple affair. The imam
asked Khalifa if he wished to ask for Asha Fuadi to
become his wife and he said yes. Then Bwana Amur
Biashara as a senior male relative gave consent in her
name. All done. After the ceremony coffee was served
and then Khalifa was accompanied by the merchant
himself to her house and introduced to his new wife.
The house was the property Asha Fuadi inherited, only
she did not inherit it.
Asha was twenty, Khalifa thirty-one. Asha’s late mother
was Amur Biashara’s sister. Asha’s eyes were still
shadowed by her recent sorrow. Her face was
oval-shaped and pleasing, her demeanour solemn and
unsmiling. Khalifa took to her without hesitation but was
aware that she was only enduring his embraces at first.
It took a while for her to return his ardour and to tell
him her story and for him to understand her fully. This
was not because her story was unusual, quite the
opposite, in fact, since it was the common practice of
pirate merchants in their world. She was reticent
because it took her a while to trust her new husband
and be sure where his loyalty lay, with the merchant or
with her.
‘My Uncle Amur lent money to my father, not once
but several times,’ she told Khalifa. ‘He had no choice
since my father was his sister’s husband, a member of
his own family. When asked he had to give. Uncle Amur
had little time for my father, thought him unreliable with
money, which was probably true. I heard my mother
say that to his face several times. In the end Uncle
Amur asked that my father sign over his house … our
house, this house … as security for a loan. He did that
but did not tell my mother. That’s what men are like
with their business affairs, furtive and secretive, as if
they cannot trust their frivolous womenfolk. She would
not have let him do it if she had known. It is an evil
practice, lending money to borrowers who cannot afford
to repay it and then taking their houses from them. It’s
theft. And that’s what Uncle Amur did to my father and
to us.’
‘How much did your father owe?’ Khalifa asked when
Asha fell into a long silence.
‘It doesn’t matter how much,’ she said tersely. ‘We still
wouldn’t have been able to repay it. He left nothing.’
‘His passing must have been sudden. Perhaps he
thought he had more time.’
She nodded. ‘He certainly did not plan his passing very
well. During the long rains last year, he suffered a
recurrence of malarial fever, which he did every year,
but this time it was worse than any other time before
and he did not survive. It was sudden and horrible to
see him in such a state before he went. May God have
mercy on his soul. My mother did not really know his
affairs in detail, but we soon found out that the loan
was still unpaid and there was nothing left with which to
make even a gesture of payment. His male relatives
came to demand their share of his inheritance, which
was really only the house, but soon found that it
belonged to Uncle Amur. It came as a horrible shock to
everyone, especially to my mother. We had nothing in
the world, nothing. Worse than nothing, we did not even
have our lives because Uncle Amur was our guardian as
the senior male relative in our family. He could decide
what happened to us. My mother never recovered after
my father died. She first fell ill many years before and
was always ailing after that. I used to think it was
sorrow, that she was not as ill as she said but allowed
herself to moulder out of misery. I don’t really know
why she was miserable. Maybe someone made medicine
against her, or perhaps her life was a disappointment.
Sometimes she was visited and spoke in unfamiliar
voices, and then a healer was called in despite my
father’s protests. After he died her misery turned into
overwhelming grief, but in the last few months of her
life another agony afflicted her: pains in her back and
something that was eating her up from inside. That’s
what she said it felt like, something eating her up from
inside. I knew she was going then, that this went
beyond grieving. In her last days she worried about
what would happen to me and begged Uncle Amur to
look after me, which he promised to do.’ Asha looked
gravely at her husband for a long moment and then
said, ‘So he gave me to you.’
‘Or he gave me to you,’ he said, smiling to lighten the
bitterness in her tone. ‘Is it such a disaster?’
She shrugged. Khalifa understood, or could guess, the
reasons why Amur Biashara had decided to offer Asha
to him. In the first place he was making her someone
else’s responsibility. Then it would prevent any shameful
liaison she might be tempted into, whether she had
anything in mind or not. It was the way a powerful
patriarch would think. Utamsitiri, Khalifa was to save her
from shame and keep the name of the family clean. He
was nothing special but the merchant knew who he was
and marriage to him would protect her name, and
therefore Amur Biashara’s name, from any possible
dishonour. A safe marriage to someone dependent on
him like Khalifa would also preserve the merchant’s
property interest intact, keep the matter of the house in
the family, so to speak.
Even when Khalifa knew the story of the house and
understood the injustice of his wife’s position he could
not speak about it to the merchant. These were family
affairs and he was not really family. Instead he
persuaded Asha to speak to her uncle herself, asking
for her portion back. ‘He can be just when he wants to
be,’ Khalifa told her, wanting to believe that himself. ‘I
know him quite well. I’ve seen him at work. You have
to put him to shame, make him give you your rights,
otherwise he will pretend all is well and do nothing.’
In the end she spoke to her uncle. Khalifa was not
present when she did and pleaded ignorance when the
merchant politely questioned him about it afterwards. Her
uncle told Asha he had already left a portion for her in
his will and wanted the matter left there for now. In
other words, he was not to be bothered with any
further discussion about the house.
*
It was early 1907 when Khalifa and Asha married. The
Maji Maji uprising was in the final throes of its brutalities,
suppressed at a great cost in African lives and
livelihoods. The rebellion started in Lindi and spread
everywhere in the countryside and towns of the south
and west of the country. It lasted for three years. As
the widespread extent of the resistance to German rule
sank in, so the response of the colonial administration
became more relentless and brutal. The German
command saw that the revolt could not be defeated by
military means alone and proceeded to starve the people
into submission. In the regions that had risen, the
schutztruppe treated everyone as combatants. They
burned villages and trampled fields and plundered food
stores. African bodies were left hanging on roadside
gibbets in a landscape that was scorched and terrorised.
In the part of the country where Khalifa and Asha lived,
they only knew of these events from hearsay. To them
these were only shocking stories because there was no
visible rebellion in their town. There had not been any
since the hanging of al Bushiri although threats of
German retribution were all around them.
The steadfastness of the refusal of these people to
become subjects of the Deutsch-Ostafrika empire had
come as a surprise to the Germans, especially after the
examples that had been made of the Wahehe in the
south and the Wachagga and Wameru people in the
mountains of the north-east. The Maji Maji victory left
hundreds of thousands dead from starvation and many
hundreds more from battlefield wounds or by public
execution. To some of the rulers of Deutsch-Ostafrika,
this outcome was viewed as unavoidable. Their passing
was inevitable sooner or later. In the meantime, the
empire had to make the Africans feel the clenched fist
of German power in order that they should learn to
bear the yoke of their servitude compliantly. With each
passing day that German power was pushing that yoke
firmly on the necks of its reluctant subjects. The colonial
administration was strengthening its hold over the land,
growing in numbers and in reach. Good land was taken
over as more German settlers arrived. The forced labour
regime was extended to build roads and clear roadside
gutters and make avenues and gardens for the leisure
of the colonists and the good name of the Kaisereich.
The Germans were latecomers to empire-building in this
part of the world but they were digging in to stay for a
long time and wanted to be comfortable while they were
about it. Their churches and colonnaded offices and
crenellated fortresses were built as much to provide a
means for civilised life as to awe their newly conquered
subjects and impress their rivals.
The latest uprising made some among the Germans
think differently. It was clear to them that violence alone
was not enough to subdue the colony and make it
productive, so clinics were proposed and campaigns
against malaria and cholera initiated. At first these served
the health and well-being of the settlers and officials and
the schutztruppe, but later were extended to include the
native people too. The administration also opened new
schools. There was already an advanced school in the
town, opened several years before to train Africans as
civil servants and teachers, but its intake was small and
limited to a subordinate elite. Now schools were opened,
intended to offer an elementary education to more of
the subject people, and Amur Biashara was one of the
first to send his son to one of them. The son, whose
name was Nassor, was nine years old when Khalifa
came to work for the merchant and fourteen when he
started school. It was a little late to be doing so but
that did not matter too much because the school he
went to was intended to teach pupils trades not algebra,
and his age was appropriate for learning how to use a
saw or lay a brick or swing a heavy hammer. It was
there that the merchant’s son came to learn about
working wood. He was in the school for four years, at
the end of which he was literate and numerate and a
competent carpenter.
During those years Khalifa and Asha had lessons of
their own to learn. He learned that she was an
energetic and obstinate woman who liked to keep busy
and knew what she wanted. At first he marvelled at her
energy and laughed at her opinionated summaries of
their neighbours. They were envious, they were vicious,
they were blasphemers, she said. Oh, come on, stop
exaggerating, he protested while she frowned in
stubborn disagreement. She did not think she was
exaggerating, she said. She had lived beside these
people all her life. He had taken her invocation of God’s
name and her quotations of verses of the Koran to be
a manner of speaking some people had, an idiom, but
he came to understand that for her it was not just an
exhibition of her knowledge and sophistication but of
serious piety. He thought she was unhappy and tried to
think of ways to make her feel less alone. He tried to
make her want him as he wanted her, but she was
self-contained and reluctant and he thought she merely
tolerated him and submitted to his ardour and embraces
dutifully at best.
She learned that she was stronger than him, although
it took her a long time to say it so bluntly to herself.
She knew her own mind, often if not every time, and
once she did she was firm whereas he was easily
swayed by words, sometimes his own. Her memory of
her father, about whom she tried to be respectful as
her religion commanded, interfered with her judgement
of her husband and, increasingly, she struggled to
contain her impatience with Khalifa. When she could not,
she spoke to him sharply in a manner she did not
intend and sometimes regretted. He was steady but too
obedient to her uncle who was nothing but a thief and
an impious hypocrite with his lying saintly manners. Her
husband was too easily satisfied and often taken
advantage of, but it was as He wished it to be and she
would do her best to be content. She found his endless
stories tiresome.
Asha miscarried three times in the early years of their
marriage. After the third miscarriage in three years she
was persuaded by neighbours to consult a herbalist, a
mganga. The mganga made her lie down on the floor
and covered her from head to toe with a kanga. Then
she sat beside her for a long period, humming softly
and repeatedly, and speaking words Asha could not
make out. Afterwards the mganga told her that an
invisible had taken her and was refusing to allow a child
to grow in her. The invisible could be persuaded to
leave but they would have to find out its demands and
fulfil them before it would do so. The only way they
could know the demands was by allowing the invisible to
speak through Asha, and that was most likely to
happen when it was allowed to possess her fully.
The mganga brought an assistant with her and made
Asha lie down again on the floor. They covered her with
a thick marekani sheet and then both began to hum
and sing, their faces close to her head. As time passed
and the mganga and her assistant sang, Asha shivered
and trembled with increasing intensity until finally she
burst out in incomprehensible words and sounds. Her
outburst reached a climax with a yell and then she
spoke lucidly but in a strange voice, saying: I will leave
this woman if her husband makes a promise to take
her on the hajj, to go to the mosque regularly and to
give up taking snuff. The mganga crowed with triumph
and administered a herbal drink, which calmed Asha and
sent her into a doze.
When the mganga told Khalifa, in Asha’s presence,
about the invisible and its demands, he nodded
compliantly and paid her her fee. I will give up taking
snuff at once, he said, and I will just now go and
perform my ablutions and head for the mosque. On my
way back I will start enquiries about making the hajj.
Now please get rid of this devil at once.
Khalifa did give up snuff, and he went to the mosque
for a day or two but he never mentioned the hajj
again. Asha knew that even while he was acting
compliant Khalifa was not persuaded, was just laughing
at her. It made it all the worse that she had allowed
herself to agree to the blasphemous treatments her
neighbours suggested. All that humming in her ears had
become tiresome but she could not help it, she really
did find Khalifa’s lack of prayers irksome and wished for
the hajj above all things. She found his quiet mockery
of these desires deeply estranging. It made her reluctant
to try again for a child and she found ways to
discourage his ardour and avoid the disagreeable fuss
he made when aroused.
His lessons fully learned, Nassor Biashara left the
German trade school at the age of eighteen, besotted
with the smell of wood. Amur Biashara was indulgent
with his son. He did not expect him to help out in the
business, for the same reason he did not require Khalifa
to know the details of his many transactions. He
preferred to work alone. When Nassor asked his father
to finance a carpentry workshop so he could go into
business for himself, the merchant was happy to oblige,
both because it sounded like a good venture and also
because it would keep his son out of his affairs for the
moment. There will be time to initiate him into the
business later.
The way of the old merchants was lending and
borrowing from each other on trust. Some of them only
knew each other by letters or through mutual
connections. Money passed from hand to hand – a debt
sold on in payment for another debt, consignments
bought and sold unseen. These connections were as far
away as Mogadishu, Aden, Muscat, Bombay, Calcutta,
and all those other places of legend. The names were
like music to many people who lived in the town,
perhaps because most of them had not been to any of
them. It was not that they could not imagine that they
were all probably places of hardship and struggle and
poverty, just like everywhere else, but they could not
resist the strange beauty of those names.
The old merchants’ business dealings depended on
trust but that did not mean they trusted each other.
That was why Amur Biashara did his business in his
head, only he did not bother to keep his records
straight and in the end his cunning failed him. It was
bad luck, or fate, or God’s plan, as you will, but he
was suddenly taken ill in one of those terrible epidemics
that used to occur much more often before the
Europeans came with their medicines and their hygiene.
Who would have thought how many diseases lurked in
the filth people were so used to living with? He fell ill in
one of those epidemics, despite the Europeans. When
it’s your time, it’s your time. It might have been dirty
water or bad meat or a bite from a poisonous pest that
was the cause but the outcome was that he woke up
in the early hours one morning with fever and vomiting
and never rose from his bed again. He was barely
conscious and died within five days. In those five days
he never regained his presence of mind and all his
secrets departed with him. His creditors came along in
due course with their paperwork in good order. Those
who owed him kept their heads down and the old
merchant’s fortune was suddenly a lot smaller than had
been rumoured. Maybe he had meant to give Asha her
house back and never got around to it but he left
nothing to her in his will. The house now belonged to
Nassor Biashara, as did everything else that was left
after his mother and two sisters had taken their share
and the creditors had taken theirs.
2
Ilyas arrived in the town just before Amur Biashara’s
sudden death. He had with him a letter of introduction
to the manager of a large German sisal estate. He did
not see the manager, who was also part-owner of the
estate and could not be expected to make time for
such a trifling matter. Ilyas handed in his letter at the
administration office and was told to wait. He was
offered a glass of water by the office assistant who also
made probing conversation with him, assessing him and
his business there. After a short while, a young German
man came out of the inner office and offered him a job.
The office assistant, whose name was Habib, was to
help him settle in. Habib directed him to a school
teacher called Maalim Abdalla who helped him to rent a
room with a family he knew. By the middle of the
afternoon on his first day in the town, Ilyas was
employed and accommodated. Maalim Abdalla told him,
I’ll come by for you later so you can meet some
people. Later that afternoon he called at the house and
took Ilyas for a stroll through the town. They stopped at
two cafés for coffee and conversation and introductions.
‘Our brother Ilyas has come to work at the big sisal
estate,’ Maalim Abdalla announced. ‘He is a friend of the
manager, the great German lord himself. He speaks
German as if it’s his native language. He is lodging with
Omar Hamdani for the moment until his lordship finds
him accommodation suitable for such an eminent
member of his staff.’
Ilyas smiled and protested and bantered back. His
effortless laughter and self-deprecating manner made
people comfortable and won him new friends. It always
did. Afterwards Maalim Abdalla took him towards the port
and the German part of the town. He pointed out the
boma and Ilyas asked if that was where they hanged al
Bushiri and Maalim Abdalla said no. Al Bushiri was
hanged in Pangani, and anyway, there was not a big
enough space here for a crowd. The Germans made a
spectacle of the hanging and probably had a band and
marching troops and spectators. They would have
needed a big space for that. Their walk ended at
Khalifa’s house, which was the teacher’s regular baraza,
where he went most evenings for gossip and
conversation.
‘You are welcome,’ Khalifa said to Ilyas. ‘Everyone
needs a baraza to go to in the evening, to stay in
touch and catch up with the news. There is nothing
much else to do after work in this town.’
Ilyas and Khalifa became good friends very quickly and
within days were speaking freely with each other. Ilyas
told Khalifa about how he had run away from home as
a child and wandered around for several days before he
was kidnapped by a schutztruppe askari at the train
station and taken to the mountains. There he was freed
and sent to a German school, a mission school.
‘Did they make you pray like a Christian?’ Khalifa
asked.
They were strolling by the sea and could not be
overheard but Ilyas was quiet for a moment, his lips
clamped together uncharacteristically. ‘You won’t say
anything to anyone if I tell you, will you?’ he asked.
‘They did,’ Khalifa said delightedly. ‘They made you sin.’
‘Don’t tell anyone,’ Ilyas said pleadingly. ‘It was either
that or leave school, so I pretended. They were very
pleased with me and I knew God could see what was
really in my heart.’
‘Mnafiki,’ Khalifa said, not yet ready to give up
tormenting him. ‘There is a special punishment for
hypocrites when you get there. Shall I tell you about it?
No, it’s unspeakable and you will have it coming to you
sooner or later.’
‘God knows what was in my heart, in there under lock
and key,’ Ilyas said, touching his chest and smiling too
now that Khalifa was making a joke of it. ‘I lived and
worked on a coffee farm belonging to the German who
sent me to school.’
‘Was there still fighting up there?’ Khalifa asked.
‘No, I don’t know how much fighting there was before,
but it was all over when I was there,’ Ilyas said. ‘It was
very peaceful. There were new farms and schools, new
towns as well. Local people sent their children to the
mission school and worked on the German farms. If
there was any trouble it was the work of bad people
who like to make an uproar. The farmer who sent me
to school, he wrote the letter that got me the job in
this town. The manager of the estate is a relative of
his.’
Later Ilyas said, ‘I’ve never been back to the village
where we used to live. I don’t know what happened to
the old people. Now that I’ve come to live in this town,
I realise that I am not very far from there. Actually I
knew before I came that I would be close to my old
home but tried not to think about it.’
‘You should go and visit,’ Khalifa said. ‘How long is it
since you’ve been away?’
‘Ten years,’ Ilyas said. ‘Go there for what?’
‘You should go,’ Khalifa said, remembering his own
neglect of his parents and how badly it made him feel
afterwards. ‘Go and see the family. It will only take a
day or two to get there if you get a ride. It’s not right
to keep your distance. You should go and tell them that
you are well. I’ll come with you if you want.’
‘No,’ Ilyas said defensively, ‘you don’t know what kind
of a mean and miserable place it is.’
‘Then you can show them what a success you have
made of yourself. It’s your home and your family is
your family, whatever you think,’ Khalifa said more firmly
as Ilyas was weakening.
Ilyas sat frowning for a moment or two and then his
eyes slowly brightened. ‘I’ll go,’ he said, becoming
excited about the idea. He was like that, Khalifa was to
find out. When he was taken by a plan Ilyas threw
himself at it. ‘Yes, you’re talking sense. I’ll go on my
own. I’ve thought about it many times but managed to
put it off. It takes a big mouth like you to force the
issue and make me do it.’
Khalifa arranged for a cart driver who was headed in
the direction of the village to give Ilyas a lift part of the
way. He also gave him the name of a trading contact
who lived on the main road not very far from his
destination. He could stop there overnight if necessary. A
few days later Ilyas was a passenger on a donkey cart
headed on its bumpy way south on the coast road. The
driver was an old Baluchi man who was taking supplies
to the country shops along the route. He did not have
a great deal to deliver. He stopped at two shops after
which they turned inland on a better road, jogging along
at such a good pace that they arrived at the contact
Khalifa had provided in mid-afternoon. The contact
turned out to be an Indian trader in fresh foodstuffs
whose name was Karim. He bought food from local
people and sent it to the market in the town: bananas,
cassava, pumpkins, sweet potatoes, okra – hardy
vegetables that could survive a day or two on the road.
The Baluchi man fed and watered his donkey and then
seemed to have a whispered conversation with her. He
said that it was early enough for him to make a start
on the return trip and stop overnight at one of the
shops he had delivered to earlier, and that the donkey
was willing. Karim supervised the loading of produce on
the Baluchi’s cart, writing the figures in his ledger and
copying the numbers on a rough scrap of paper for the
driver to take to his buyer in the market in town.
After the driver’s departure, Ilyas explained what he
was after and Karim looked dubious. He looked around
him at the light, pulled a watch out of his waistcoat
pocket, clicked open the cover with a flourish and
waggled his head mournfully.
‘Tomorrow morning,’ he said. ‘Today is not possible.
It’s only an hour and a half before maghrib, and by the
time I arrange a driver for you it will be approaching
dusk. You don’t want to be on the road at night.
Looking for trouble. You could easily get lost or run into
bad people. Tomorrow morning, first thing, you shall go.
I will speak to a driver tonight, but for now you will rest
and let us welcome you here. We have a room for
visitors. Come.’
Ilyas was shown to a small room with an earthen floor
adjoining the store. Both the store and the room had
rickety doors of rusty corrugated-metal sheets kept
closed by iron padlocks which looked more ceremonial
than secure. Inside the little room was a rope bed
covered with a mat, certain to be crawling with bedbugs,
Ilyas thought to himself. He noticed at once that there
was no mosquito net and sighed with resignation. These
were guest quarters for hardy itinerant traders but there
was no choice. He could not expect Karim to invite a
male stranger into his family home.
Ilyas hooked his canvas bag on the door frame and
went out to look around. Karim’s house was in the
same yard and was a solidly built structure with two
barred windows facing front, one either side of the door.
It had a raised patio three steps from the ground.
Karim was sitting on a mat on the patio, and when he
saw Ilyas he waved him over. They sat talking for a
while, about the town, about news of a devastating
cholera epidemic in Zanzibar, about business, then a
young girl of seven or eight came out of the house with
two small cups of coffee on a wooden tray. As dusk
approached, Karim pulled out his watch again and
glanced at the time.
‘Maghrib prayers,’ he said. He called and after a
moment the girl came out again, this time struggling
with a bucket of water, which Karim laughingly relieved
her of. He took the steps to the ground and put the
bucket to one side, on a platform of stones arranged
for washing feet. He gestured for his guest to come and
make his ablutions first but Ilyas demurred energetically,
so Karim went ahead and performed the cleansing in
preparation for prayer. Then it was Ilyas’s turn and he
did what he saw Karim do. They went back up to the
patio where the prayer was to take place, and as was
customary and polite, Karim invited Ilyas to lead the
prayer. Once again he energetically demurred and Karim
stepped forward to lead.
Ilyas did not know how to pray, did not know the
words. He had never been inside a mosque. There was
not one to go to where he lived as a child, and there
was not one on the coffee farm where he spent so
many years later. There was a mosque in the nearby
mountain town but no one at the farm or the school
told him he should go there. Then at some point it was
too late to learn, too shaming. By then he was a grown
man working at the sisal estate and living in a town
thronged with mosques, but there too no one asked
him to go to the mosque. He knew that sooner or later
something embarrassing was likely to happen. Karim’s
invitation to pray was the first time he had been caught
out and he faked it as best he could, copying his every
gesture and muttering as if he was speaking sacred
words.
As promised, Karim arranged for another driver to take
Ilyas to his old village, which was not far away. After a
restless night, he came out as soon as he heard
movement in the yard and was offered a banana and a
tin mug of black tea for breakfast while he waited for
the driver to turn up. He caught sight of the little girl
sweeping the patio but there was no sign of her
mother. The driver this time was a teenager who was
happy to go on an outing and talked all the way about
recent escapades he and his friends had engaged in.
Ilyas listened politely and laughed when he was required
but thought to himself: Country bumpkin.
They reached the village in an hour or so. The driver
said he would wait on the main road because the path
to the village was too narrow for the cart. It was only a
short walk down the path he had pulled up beside. Yes,
I know, Ilyas said. He took the path that led to where
their old house used to be, and everything seemed as
disorderly and familiar as if he had only left a few
months before. It was not much of a village, a straggle
of thatched houses with small cultivated fields behind
them. Before he reached their old house he saw a
woman whose name he could not remember but whose
face was familiar. She was sitting in the cleared space
outside her frail-looking wattle-and-mud house, weaving a
mat from coconut leaves. A pot warmed on a trio of
stones beside her feet and two chickens were pecking
at the ground around the house. As he approached,
she straightened her kanga and covered her head.
‘Shikamoo,’ he said.
She replied and waited, looking him up and down in
his town clothes. He could not guess her age but if she
was who he thought she was then she was the mother
of children his age. One of them was Hassan, he
remembered suddenly, a boy he used to play with.
Ilyas’s father’s name was also Hassan, that was why
the name came back to him so easily. The woman was
sitting on a low stool and made no attempt to rise or
smile.
‘My name is Ilyas. I used to live up there,’ he said,
giving her his parents’ names. ‘Do they still live up
there?’
She made no reply and he was not sure if she heard
or understood him. He was about to move on and see
for himself when a man came out from inside the
house. He was older than the woman and walked
haltingly up to Ilyas and looked at him closely as if his
sight was poor. His face was lined and unshaven and
he looked frail and unwell. Ilyas said his name again,
and the names of his parents. The man and woman
exchanged a look and then it was she who spoke.
‘I remember that name Ilyas. Are you the one who
was lost?’ she said, and covered her head briefly with
both hands in commiseration. ‘Many terrible things were
happening then and we all thought you had suffered a
misfortune. We thought you were kidnapped by the
ruga ruga or the wamanga. We thought the Mdachi
killed you. I don’t know what we didn’t think. Yes, I
remember Ilyas. Is that you? You look like a
government man. Your mother passed on a long time
ago. No one lives up there now, their house has fallen
down. She had such bad luck no one wanted to live
there. She left a little baby for your father to look after,
fifteen or sixteen months old, and he left her for other
people.’
Ilyas thought about this for a moment then he said,
‘Left her for other people. What does that mean?’
‘He gave her away.’ The man spoke now, his voice
weak and rasping with effort. ‘He was very poor. Very
ill. Like all of us. He gave her away.’ He raised his arm
and pointed in the direction of the road, too weary to
say more.
‘Afiya, that was her name. Afiya,’ the woman
continued. ‘Where have you come from? Your mother is
dead. Your father is dead. Your sister is given away.
Where have you been?’
It was somehow what he had expected, that they
would be dead. His father had been ill with diabetes all
Ilyas’s young life, and his mother was often unwell from
unnameable ailments that afflicted women. In addition
her back hurt, breathing was a struggle, her chest was
thick with water and she was often retching from
endless pregnancies. It was what he had expected but it
still shocked him to have their deaths announced so
abruptly. ‘Is my sister here in the village?’ he asked at
last.
The man spoke again and in his tortured voice told
him where the family who had taken Afiya lived. He
accompanied Ilyas to the main road and gave directions
to the young cart driver.
*
The small roadside village where she grew up was
overlooked by a dark conical hill covered in scrub. It
was always there whenever she stepped out of the
house, leaning over the houses and yards across the
road, but she did not see it when she was a very small
child and only became aware of it later when she
learned to give meaning to habitual sights. She was told
that she was never to go up there but was not told
why, so she populated the hill with all the terrors she
was learning to imagine. It was her aunt who told her
she must never go up the hill, and also told stories
about a snake that could swallow a child, and a tall
man whose shadow flitted across the roofs of houses
when the moon was full, and a dishevelled old woman
who roamed the road to the sea and sometimes took
the form of a leopard who raided the village for a goat
or a baby. Her aunt did not say so but the girl was
sure that the snake and the tall man and the
dishevelled old woman all lived on the hill and came
down from there to terrorise the world.
Behind the houses and the backyards were the fields
and beyond those rose the hill. As she grew older it
seemed that the hill loomed even larger over the village,
especially at dusk, shouldering over them like a
discontented spirit. She learned to avert her gaze if she
had to go out of the house at night. In the deep
silence of the night she heard soft hissing whispers
creeping down and sometimes they came around and
behind the house as well. Her aunt told her these were
the invisibles which only women heard, but however sad
and insistent their whispers she was not to open the
door to them. Much later she knew that the boys went
up the hill and came back safely, and they never spoke
of a snake or a tall man or a dishevelled old woman,
and never mentioned whispers. They said that they went
hunting on the hill, and if they caught anything they
roasted it over a fire and ate it. They always came
back empty-handed so she did not know if they were
making fun of her.
The road past the village ran on to the coast in one
direction and to the deep interior in the other. It was
mostly used by people on foot, some of them carrying
heavy loads, and sometimes by men on donkeys or on
ox-carts. It was wide enough for the carts but uneven
and bumpy. In the distance behind them the silhouette
of mountains ran across the horizon. Their names were
strange and made her think of danger.
She lived with her aunt and uncle and her brother and
sister. Her brother was called Issa and her sister
Zawadi. She was expected to rise at the same time as
her aunt, who shook her awake and gave her a sharp
little slap on her bottom to make her get up. Wake up,
mischief. Her aunt’s name was Malaika but they all called
her Mama. The girl’s first chore after she was up was
to fetch the water while her aunt lit the braziers, which
were cleaned and packed with charcoal from the night
before. Water was not in short supply but it had to be
fetched. There was a bucket and a ladle outside the
bathroom door for use in there. There was another
bucket by the sluice that led to the outside gutter, which
was where they washed the pots and dishes, and
where they poured away the water after washing
clothes, but for her uncle’s bath and for making tea she
had to fetch the water from the huge clay tank,
covered and kept under an awning to stay cool. It had
to be clean water for her uncle’s bath and for his tea,
and the water in the buckets was only for dirty work.
Sometimes the water made people ill, which was why
she had to warm clean water for her uncle’s bath and
for the tea.
The tank was high and she was small so she had to
stand on an upturned crate to be able to reach the
water, and when the level was low or if the water-seller
had not come to replenish the tank, she had to reach
so far in that half her body was in the slippery tank. If
she spoke while her head was in the tank her voice
had a demonic sound, which made her feel enormous.
She did that sometimes even when she was not
fetching water, put her head into the tank and made
gloating, groaning sounds as if she was huge. She
ladled the water into two pans but only half-filled them
because otherwise they were too heavy for her to
carry. She took them one by one to the two braziers
her aunt had started, then topped up the pans with
repeated trips to the tank until the water in the pans
was the right amount, one for her uncle’s bath and the
other for the tea.
The first she knew of anything in the world was living
with them, her aunt and uncle. The brother Issa and
sister Zawadi were older than her, maybe five or six
years older. They were not her brother and sister, of
course, but she still thought of them like that even
though they teased her and hurt her as part of their
games. Sometimes they beat her very deliberately, not
because she had done anything to provoke them but
because they liked to do it and she could not stop
them. They beat her whenever it was only the children
in the house and no one was there to hear her cries,
or if they were bored, which was often. They asked her
to do things she did not like and when she cried or
refused they slapped her and spat at her. There was
not much to do after her chores but if she followed
them when they went out to play with their friends or
to steal fruit from the neighbours’ trees, they did not
always like it nor did their friends. The girls called her
dirty names to make the boys laugh and sometimes
they chased her away. It was for different reasons but
her brother and sister beat her or pinched her or stole
her food, every day. She did not feel very sad that
they beat her and pinched her and stole her food. It
did not hurt very much and other things made her feel
more sad, made her feel small and a stranger in this
world. Other children were also beaten every day.
From a very young age she was required to do
chores. She did not remember when it started, but she
was always called to do something, sweeping or fetching
water or running to the shop for her aunt. Later she
washed clothes and chopped and peeled as required,
and warmed the water for her uncle’s bath and the
household’s tea. Other children in the village were
required to do chores for their uncles and aunts too, in
the house and in the fields. Her uncle and aunt did not
have a field or even a garden, so all her chores were
in the house or the backyard. Her aunt spoke to her
sharply at times, but more often she was kind and told
her stories. Some of these stories were terrifying, like
the one about a ragged bloated man with long dirty
fingernails who walked on the road at night, dragging an
iron chain behind him, looking to capture a little girl and
take her to his burrow underground. You can always
hear him coming because of the chain dragging on the
ground. Many of her aunt’s stories were about dirty old
people who stole little girls. When she saw Issa or
Zawadi mistreating the child she rebuked or even
punished them. Treat her like your sister, the poor girl,
she told them.
Her mother was dead, she knew that, but she did not
know why her aunt and her uncle were the ones who
took her in. One day when she was in her sixth year
her aunt told her, ‘We took you in because you were
orphaned and your father was sickening. Your mother
and father lived further along the road and we knew
them. Your poor mother was unlucky with her health
and she died when you were very small, about two
years old. Your father brought you to us and asked us
to take you until he was better, but he did not become
better and God took him away too. These things are in
God’s hands. Since then you have been our burden.’
Her aunt told her this as she was oiling and plaiting
her hair after washing it, which she did every week to
keep away the lice. She was sitting between her aunt’s
knees and could not see her face but her voice was
gentle, even tender. After she was told this, she knew
that they were not really her uncle and her aunt, and
that her father was also dead. She did not remember
her mother but it still made her sad to think of her.
When she tried to imagine her she could only see one
of the village women.
Her uncle did not speak to her very much, nor she to
him. He frowned when she did so, even when it was
only to deliver a message from her aunt. When he
wanted her to come to him, he snapped his fingers or
called out: You! His name was Makame. He was a big
man, with a round face and a round nose and a large
round stomach. He was satisfied when everything was
as he wanted it. When he spoke sharply to one of his
children, the house trembled and shook with his rage
and everyone fell silent. She avoided his eyes because
they were often hot and frightening in his glowering
face. She knew he did not like her but she did not
know what she had done to make him feel that way.
His hands were large and his arm was as thick as her
neck. When he slapped her on the back of her head
she staggered and felt dizzy.
Her aunt had a habit of nodding several times when
she wanted to say something firmly, and because her
face was narrow and drawn and her nose was pointed,
she looked as if she was pecking at something in the
air when she did so. ‘Your uncle is a very strong man,’
her aunt told her. ‘That’s why he is employed as a
security guard at the serikali depot. He opens and
closes the gates to keep the vagrants out. The
government chose him. They are all afraid of him. They
say, Makame has a fist like a club. If it was not for him
they would behave like hooligans and steal things.’
From her earliest memory she slept on the floor just
inside the entranceway to the house. When she opened
the door in the morning she saw the hill, and even
when the door was closed at night she knew it was
there, looming over them all. The dogs barked in the
night and mosquitoes whined around her face and
insects rattled and screeched just the other side of the
flimsy and cracked door. Then they fell silent when the
whispers began to descend from the hill all the way to
the back of the house. She kept her eyes tightly shut
in case she saw discontented eyes peering at her
through the cracks in the door panels.
It was a small house made of mud bricks and
whitewashed inside and out. There were two small
rooms divided by the entranceway and a back door that
opened on to the yard. A cane fence ran around this,
and out there were the washroom and kitchen. The
other four slept in the larger of the two rooms, mother
and daughter in one bed and father and son in the
other. Sometimes the younger people slept in the smaller
room, which was used during the day for a sitting room
or as somewhere to store things or to eat or to receive
neighbours when they called. The village was a long
way into the country, so there was no running water,
which was why she had to fetch the water for her
uncle’s bath and for the tea from the huge clay tank
the water-seller filled up every time it was low. The
water-seller fetched the water from the village well a
short distance away then he went from house to house,
pulling his cart himself, and filled up the tanks of the
people who paid him. Many people went to the well
themselves or sent a child but her aunt and uncle could
afford to pay.
One day she was in the yard helping her aunt with
the washing when they heard someone calling out from
the front door. Go and see who it is, her aunt said. At
the door she found a man dressed in a long-sleeved
white shirt and khaki trousers and thick-soled soft-leather
shoes. He stood on the step, just up from the road,
holding a canvas bag in his right hand. He was
obviously a man from town, from the coast.
‘Karibu,’ she said, speaking the polite word of welcome.
‘Marahaba,’ he said, smiling. Then after a moment he
said, ‘Can I ask your name?’
‘Afiya,’ she said.
He smiled more widely and sighed at the same time.
Then he went down on his haunches so their faces
were level. ‘I am your brother,’ he said. ‘I have been
looking for you for so long. I did not know if you lived,
or if Ma and Ba lived. Now I have found you, thank
God. Are the people of the house inside?’
She nodded and went to call her aunt, who came out
wiping her hands with her kanga. The man, now
standing tall again, introduced himself by name. ‘I am
Ilyas, her brother,’ he said. ‘I went to our old home
and found that my people were passed away.
Neighbours told me my sister was here. I didn’t know.’
Her aunt seemed perturbed by what he had said for a
moment, and perhaps also by his appearance. He was
dressed like a government man. ‘Karibu. We did not
know where you were. Please wait while Afiya goes to
fetch her uncle,’ she said. ‘Quick, go now.’
She ran to the depot and told her uncle that her aunt
said he was to come and he asked what it was about.
My brother has come, she said. From where? he asked,
but she just ran on before him. When they reached the
house, he was a little breathless but he was polite and
smiling, which was not how he usually was at home.
Her brother was in the small room, cramped and
cluttered as usual, and her uncle joined him there,
shaking hands and beaming with delight. ‘You are
welcome, our brother. We thank God for keeping you
safe and for leading you to our house so you can meet
your sister. Your father told us that you were lost. We
did not know what to do to find you. We have done
our best to look after her. She is like one of ours now,’
he said, left hand on heart while his right arm was
extended wide in a gesture of welcome.
‘I don’t know if you remember me, but I can assure
you I am who I say I am,’ her brother said.
‘I can see the family resemblance,’ her uncle said.
‘There is no need for assurances.’
When Afiya came back a few minutes later with two
glasses of water on a tray, she found them deep in
conversation. She heard her brother say, ‘Thank you for
looking after her for so long. I cannot thank you
enough but now that I’ve found her, I would like to
take her to live with me.’
‘We will be sorry to lose her,’ her uncle said, his face
shiny with dried sweat. ‘She is our own daughter now,
and her living with us is an expense we gladly bear, but
of course she must live with her brother. Blood is
blood.’
They talked together for some time before they called
for her to come in. Her brother gestured for her to sit
while he explained that she was to come and live with
him in the town. She was to gather her things and be
ready to leave with him in a short while. She collected
her little bundle and was ready within minutes. Her aunt
watched her closely. Just like that, not even thank you,
goodbye, she said reproachfully. Thank you, goodbye,
Afiya said, ashamed of her own haste.
She did not even know she had a real brother. She
could not believe he was here, that he had just walked
in off the road and was waiting to take her away. He
was so clean and beautiful, and he laughed so easily.
He told her afterwards that he was angry with her
uncle and aunt but he did not show it because it would
have seemed that he was being ungrateful when they
had taken her in although she was not a relative. They
had taken her in, that was not nothing. He gave them
some money as a gift for their kindness but he did not
need to, because she was in filthy rags when he found
her as if she was their slave. ‘If anything they should
have paid you for having made you work for them like
that for so long,’ he said. It did not feel like that to her
at the time, only afterwards, after she started living with
him.
That same morning he found her, he took her away
with him on the donkey cart to Karim’s shop. She had
never travelled on a donkey cart before. They waited at
the shop for a lift back and then the next day they
went on another donkey cart where she sat among
baskets of mangoes and cassava and sacks of grain
while her brother shared the driver’s bench. He took
her to the small town on the coast where he lived. In
the town, he rented a downstairs room in a family
home, and when they arrived he took her upstairs to
meet the people who lived up there. The mother and
her teenaged daughters were in and they said she was
to come upstairs whenever she wished. During the time
Afiya lived with her brother she slept on a bed for the
first time in her life. She had her bed at one end of
the room under her own mosquito net and he had his
at the other. There was a table in the middle of the
room where every afternoon he made her do lessons
when he came back from work.
One morning, a few days after he brought her to the
town, he took her to the government hospital near the
seashore. She had never seen the sea. A man in a
white coat scratched her arm and then asked her to
urinate in a small pot. Ilyas explained the scratching was
to prevent her from falling ill with fever and the urine
was to test if she had bilharzia. It’s German medicine,
he said.
When Ilyas went to work in the morning, she went
upstairs with the family and they made room for her
without any effort. They asked questions about her and
she told them what little there was to tell. She helped in
the kitchen because that was work she knew how to
do or sat with the sisters while they talked and sewed,
and sometimes they sent her on errands to the shop
down the street. Their names were Jamila and Saada
and they became her friends from the start. Later, she
had her meal with them when their father came home.
She was told to call their father Uncle Omari, which
made her feel she was part of the family. In the
afternoon, after her brother came back from work and
had a wash, she took his lunch to him downstairs and
sat with him while he ate.
‘You must learn to read and write,’ he said. She had
not seen anyone read or write although she knew what
writing was because it was on the tins and boxes in the
village shop, and she had seen a book on a shelf
above the shopkeeper’s stool. The shopkeeper told her
it was a holy book you should not touch without first
washing yourself as if you were preparing for prayer.
She did not think she would be able to learn a book
that holy but her brother laughed at her and made her
sit beside him while he wrote out the letters and made
her say them after him. Later she practised writing the
letters herself.
One afternoon, when the people upstairs were out, he
took her with him as he went to call on one of his
friends. His name was Khalifa, and Ilyas said this was
his best friend in the town. They teased each other and
laughed and then after a while her brother said they
would continue with their walk but he promised to bring
her to visit again. Most mornings she went upstairs and
sat with Jamila and Saada while they cooked and talked
and sewed, and sometimes in the evenings when Ilyas
went to the café or to be with his friends, she went
upstairs and practised reading and writing her letters
under the sisters’ admiring eyes. Neither of them could
read, nor could their mother.
Her brother did not always go out, though, and some
evenings he stayed in and taught her card games or
songs or talked to her about his experiences. He told
her: ‘I ran away from home while Ma was pregnant
with you. I don’t know if I really meant to run away. I
don’t think I did. I was only eleven. Our Ma and Ba
were very poor. Everyone was poor. I don’t know how
they lived, how they survived. Ba had sugar and was
unwell and could not work. Perhaps the neighbours
helped them. I know my clothes were rags and I was
always hungry. Ma lost two of my younger sisters after
they were born. I expect it was malaria but I was only
a child and I would not have known about things like
that at the time. I remember when they both came.
After a few months they fell ill and cried for days before
they passed away. Some nights I could not sleep
because I was so hungry and because Ba was groaning
so loudly. His legs were swollen and smelled bad, like
meat that was rotting. It was not his fault, that was the
sugar. Don’t cry, I can see your eyes are getting wet. I
am not saying this to be unkind but to explain to you
that perhaps these were the things that made me want
to run away.
‘I don’t think I really meant to run away but once I
was on the road I just kept walking. No one took very
much notice of me. When I was hungry I begged for
food or stole some fruit, and at night I always found
somewhere to creep into and sleep. Some of the time I
was very frightened but at other times I forgot myself
and just looked at what was happening all around. After
several days I arrived in a big town on the coast, this
town. I saw soldiers marching through the streets, music
playing, heavy boots thudding on the road and a crowd
of young people marching alongside, pretending to be
soldiers too. I joined them, thrilled by the display of the
uniforms and the march and the band. The march
ended at the train station and I stood there to watch
the big iron coaches as large as houses. The engine
was groaning and puffing smoke, just like it was alive. I
had never seen a train before. A troop of askari stood
on the platform waiting to board the train, and I was
loitering around them, just watching and listening. The
Maji Maji fighting was still going on then. Do you know
about that? I didn’t know about it then either. I’ll tell
you about the Maji Maji later. When the train was
ready, the askari began to board. A Shangaan askari
pushed me on the train and held my wrist and laughed
while I struggled but he did not let me go. He told me
I was to be his gun boy, to carry his gun for him
when they marched. You will like it, he said. He took
me on the train until the end of the line, or as far as
they had built the line at that time, and then we
marched for several days all the way to the mountain
town.
‘When we arrived there we were made to wait in a
yard for a while. I think the Shangaan thought I was
no longer trying to escape him because he was not
even holding my wrist. Perhaps he thought there was
nowhere for me to run. I saw an Indian man standing
over some cargo, giving instructions to the porters and
making a note on a piece of board. I ran to him and
told him that the askari had stolen me from my home.
The Indian man told me, go away, you filthy little thief!
I must have looked very dirty. My clothes were nothing
but rags, shorts made of sacking and a torn old shirt I
did not bother to wash any more. I told the Indian
man, my name is Ilyas and that big Shangaan askari
standing there staring at us stole me from my home.
The Indian man looked away at first but then he asked
me to repeat my name. He made me say it twice more
then he smiled and said it too. Ilyas. He nodded and
took me by the hand’ – Ilyas took Afiya’s hand as he
said this, smiling like the Indian man and getting to his
feet – ‘walking towards the German officer in his white
uniform who was also there in the yard. He was the
chief of the askari and was busy with his troops. He
had hair the colour of sand and his eyebrows were the
same. That was the first German I stood close to and
that is what I saw. He frowned at me and said
something to the Indian man who said I was free to
go. I said I had nowhere to go and when the chief of
the askari heard this he frowned again and called for
another German man.’
They sat down again, Afiya still smiling and her eyes
rapt with pleasure at the story. Ilyas put on a scowling
expression and continued.
‘This other German was not an officer in a beautiful
white uniform but a rough-looking man who was
directing workers loading cargo, which the Indian man
was counting off. When the officer finished speaking to
him he summoned me to him and said sharply, What’s
your story? I told him, my name is Ilyas and an askari
stole me from my home. He repeated my name and
smiled. Ilyas, he said, that’s a nice name. Wait here until
I finish. I did not, but followed him in case the
Shangaan askari came back for me. The man worked
on a coffee farm a little way up the mountain. It
belonged to another German. He took me back to the
farm with him and gave me work in the animal pen.
They had several donkeys and a horse in her own
stable. Yes, it was a she-horse, very large and scary to
a little boy. It was a new farm and there was a lot of
work to do. That was why the rough German took me
there, because they needed people to work.
‘The farmer saw me in the pen clearing donkey dung
or something like that, I can’t remember exactly. He
asked the man who had brought me from the station
who I was. When he found out that I was stolen by an
askari he was angry. We don’t have to behave like
savages, he said. That is not what we have come here
to do. I know that was what he said because he told
me later. He was pleased with what he did and liked to
talk about it to me and to other people. He said I was
too young to work, that I should first go to school. The
Germans did not come here to make slaves, he said.
Then I was allowed to attend church school, which was
for converts. I stayed there on the farm for many
years.’
‘Was I born then?’ Afiya asked.
‘Oh, yes, you must have been born a few months
after I ran away,’ Ilyas said. ‘I was on the farm for
nine years so that means you must be about ten years
old. I really liked living there. I worked on the farm and
went to school and learned to read and write and to
sing and speak German.’
He broke off and sang some verses of what must
have been a German song. She thought his voice was
beautiful and got to her feet to applaud him when he
stopped. He was grinning with pleasure. He loved to
sing.
‘One day, not so long ago,’ he continued, ‘the farmer
called me over for a talk. He was like a father to me,
that man. He looked after all the workers, and if anyone
fell ill he sent him to the mission clinic for medicine. He
asked me if I wanted to stay on at the farm. He said I
now had too many talents for a farm labourer and was
I not curious to move back to the coast where there
were many more opportunities? He gave me a letter to
take to a relative of his here in this town who has a
sisal factory. In the letter he wrote that I was
trustworthy and respectful, and could read and write in
German. He read the letter to me before he sealed it.
That is why I have a job as a clerk in a German sisal
factory, and that is why you will learn to read and write
too, so that one day you will know about the world and
learn how to look after yourself.’
‘Yes,’ Afiya said, not ready to think about the future
just yet. ‘Did the farmer have sandy hair like the other
German in the white uniform?’
‘No, he didn’t,’ Ilyas said. ‘He had dark hair. He was
slim and deliberate, never shouting at or abusing his
workers. He looked like a … a schüler, a learned man,
a restrained man.’
Afiya gave the description of the farmer a moment’s
thought and then asked, ‘Did our Ba have dark hair?’
‘Eh, probably. It was all grey when I left but I
suppose it would have been dark earlier, when he was
younger,’ Ilyas said.
‘Did your farmer look like our Ba?’ Afiya asked.
Ilyas burst into laughter. ‘No, he looked like a
German,’ he said. ‘Our Ba …’ Ilyas stopped and shook
his head and said no more for a moment. ‘Our Ba was
unwell,’ he said.
*
‘I don’t want to speak ill of the dead so soon after,’
Khalifa said to Ilyas, ‘but that old man was a pirate. As
for the young tajiri, well, I have known him for years.
He was a little boy of nine, I think, when I started
working for Bwana Amur. Now he is grown into a
young man of panicky spirit – and who wouldn’t be with
a father who kept him so much in the dark? Then all
of a sudden here he is, presiding over a robbery as
the creditors move in. He lost a lot in the chaos that
followed his father’s death. He knew nothing about the
business and those other pirates robbed him. All he is
really interested in is wood. He even persuaded his
father to let him open that timber yard and furniture
workshop. That is what he loves to do – hang around
the timber yard and smell the wood. In the meantime,
everything else is going to hell.
‘I told you about the house. Well, we thought he was
not made of the same ugly material as his father, and
perhaps he would listen more kindly to Bi Asha’s plea
for her house, but he is greedy just like his father. He
does not have any right to this house. He should have
returned it to its proper owner but he firmly refuses to
give it up, even though he too was surprised to
discover it does not belong to Bi Asha. He could ask us
to leave, I suppose, but I think he’s too afraid of my
wife. They are cousins, you know, almost like brother
and sister, but he refuses to return the house that
rightfully belongs to her family. He is just another
greedy scoundrel.’
The two men took to meeting late in the afternoon or
early in the evening for an hour or two at the café.
They joined the general talk, which was the main
purpose of gathering there, and Khalifa, who knew
many people, introduced Ilyas to others and pumped
him for his stories, which were often about his time in
the German school in the mountain town and the
German farmer who was his benefactor. Other people
also had stories to tell, some of them quite improbable,
but that was the café style: the broader the better.
Khalifa was a well-known connoisseur of stories and
gossip and was at times consulted to arbitrate between
competing versions. When they had enough of the café
talk, they strolled along the seashore or went back to
Khalifa’s porch where in the evening some of his friends
came for a baraza. They were preoccupied at the time
with rumours of the coming conflict with the British,
which people were saying was going to be a big war,
not like the small ones before against the Arabs and the
Waswahili and the Wahehe and the Wanyamwezi and
the Wameru and all the others. Those were terrible
enough but this is going to be a big war! They have
gunships the size of a hill and ships that can travel
underwater and guns that can bombard a town miles
away. There is even talk of a machine that can fly
although no one has seen one.
‘They don’t stand a chance, the British,’ Ilyas said, and
a murmur of agreement went through the group. ‘The
Germans are gifted and clever people. They know how
to organise, they know how to fight. They think of
everything … and on top of that they are much kinder
than the British.’
His listeners hooted with laughter.
‘I don’t know about kindness,’ said one of the café
experts, a man called Mangungu. ‘For me it’s their
sternness and the viciousness of the Nubi and
Wanyamwezi askari that are going to take care of the
British. There is no one as stern as a German.’
‘You don’t know what you’re talking about,’ Ilyas said.
‘I have met with nothing but kindness from them.’
‘Listen, just because one German man has been kind
to you does not change what has happened here over
the years,’ another man, Mahmudu, said, addressing
him. ‘In the thirty years or so that they have occupied
this land, the Germans have killed so many people that
the country is littered with skulls and bones and the
earth is soggy with blood. I am not exaggerating.’
‘Yes, you are,’ Ilyas said.
‘You people here don’t know what happened in the
south,’ Mahmudu continued. ‘No, the British don’t stand
a chance, not if the fighting is on land, but it won’t be
because of German kindness.’
‘I agree. Their askari are ferocious and complete
savages. God alone knows how they have become like
that,’ said a man named Mahfudh.
‘It’s their officers. They learn their cruelty from their
officers,’ said Mangungu, speaking in a tone of authority
intended to settle the argument as he liked to do.
‘They were fighting an enemy who was just as savage
in retaliation,’ Ilyas said, undaunted. ‘You haven’t heard
half of what those people did to the Germans. They had
to be harsh in retaliation because that’s the only way
savage people can be made to understand order and
obedience. The Germans are honourable and civilised
people and have done much good since they have been
here.’
His listeners were silent in the face of such vehemence.
‘My friend, they have eaten you,’ Mangungu said
eventually, having the last word as usual.
Despite such encounters it was still a great surprise to
Khalifa when Ilyas announced that he planned to
volunteer for the schutztruppe. ‘Are you mad? What has
this to do with you?’ his friend asked. ‘This is between
two violent and vicious invaders, one among us and the
other to the north. They are fighting over who should
swallow us whole. What has this to do with you? You
will be joining an army of mercenaries renowned for
their cruelty and brutality. Didn’t you hear what
everyone was saying? You might be badly hurt … worse
even. Are you thinking straight, my friend?’
Ilyas was not to be dissuaded and refused to defend
his decision. His only concern, he said, was to make
arrangements for his little sister.
*
A whole year had raced past. For Afiya it had felt like
the happiest time of her life ever since her brother
came back and found her and filled her days with
laughter. He really did, he was always laughing and she
could not help laughing when he did. Then all of a
sudden, or that was how it seemed to her, he said ‘I
have joined the schutztruppe. Do you know what that
is? It means protection troop, jeshi la serikali. I will be
an askari. I will be a soldier for the Germans. There is
a war coming.’
‘Will you have to go away? Will it be for a long time?’
she asked him, speaking calmly although she felt
alarmed by his news.
‘It won’t be for long,’ he said, smiling reassuringly. ‘The
schutztruppe is a powerful and invincible army. Everyone
is terrified of them. I’ll be back in a few months.’
‘Will I stay here until you come back?’ she asked.
He shook his head. ‘You are too young. I can’t leave
you here on your own. I’ve asked Uncle Omar if you
can stay with the family but he does not want the
responsibility, in case … We are not related,’ Ilyas said
and then shrugged. ‘You can’t stay here and you
cannot come to war with me. I don’t want to send you
back to them, your aunt and uncle in the country, but
there is no other choice. Now they will know I am
coming back for you and they will treat you better.’
She did not know how he could send her back there,
after all he had said and after he had taught her to
see the cruelty of her life with them. She could not stop
crying for a long while. Ilyas held her in his arms and
stroked her hair and whispered reassurance. That night
he let her share his bed with him and she fell asleep
while he talked about the time he was at school in the
mountain town. She knew he was in a hurry to leave,
and she did not want him to dislike her and not come
back for her so she stopped crying when he said to
stop. The sisters made a dress for her as a goodbye
present, and their mother gave her one of her old
kangas. I’m sure you’ll be very happy there in the
country, the sisters said, and Afiya said yes. She had
not told them anything about her uncle and aunt there
– Ilyas said not to – and she did not tell them how
much she dreaded going back. They also went to say
goodbye to Khalifa and to Bi Asha. Ilyas knew that he
was posted to Dar es Salam for training.
Her brother’s friend Khalifa said to the girl, ‘I don’t
know why your elder brother is going to war instead of
staying here to look after you. This fight is nothing to
do with him. And he’s doing it in the company of
murdering askari whose hands are already covered in
blood. Listen to me, Afiya, until he returns, you must let
us know if ever you need anything. Send a message to
me at my workplace, care of the merchant Biashara.
Will you remember that?’
‘She can write,’ Ilyas said.
‘In that case, send me a note,’ said Khalifa, and the
two friends laughed as they said goodbye.
Everything was done in a few days and she was soon
back with her aunt and uncle in the country. Her few
belongings were in a small cloth bundle: the dress the
sisters made for her, the old kanga their mother gave
her, a small slate tablet and a packet of scrap paper
that her brother had brought back from work for her to
practise her writing on. She was back to sleeping on
the floor in the entranceway, in the shadow of the hill.
Her aunt treated her as if she had only been away for
a few days and expected her to return to her chores
as before. Her uncle ignored her. The daughter Zawadi
sneered and said, our slave has come back. She was
not good enough for the big brother in town. The son
Issa snapped his fingers under her nose as his father
did to summon her. Everything was a little worse than
before and it hurt more. She warned herself to put up
with it because her brother said to do so until he came
back for good. Her aunt grumbled at her more than
she used to, about how slow she was with her chores,
about the expense of taking her back even though her
brother gave them money for her upkeep. The son was
now sixteen and sometimes he pressed himself against
her and squeezed her nipples when no one was around
and she was not quick enough to escape.
In the hot, dead mid-afternoon hours a few days after
she came back to live with them, her aunt saw her
sitting in the backyard, practising writing on the slate
tablet. Her aunt had just risen from her after-lunch
sleep and was on her way to the washroom. She
looked on without a word at first and then came closer.
When she saw that the marks were not just squiggles,
she pointed to the slate and asked harshly, ‘What’s
that? Are you writing? What does it say?’
‘Jana, leo, kesho,’ Afiya said, pointing to each word in
turn. Yesterday, today, tomorrow.
Her aunt looked perturbed and disapproving but did
not say anything. She proceeded to the washroom and
Afiya hurried to put her slate away, cautioning herself to
practise discreetly in future. Her aunt did not mention
the slate again but she must have told her husband.
The next day after he had his lunch, during which she
felt an unusual tension among the family, he snapped
his fingers at Afiya and pointed to the small room. As
she turned to obey she saw a smile of anticipation on
the face of the son. She was already in the room,
facing the door, when her uncle came in with a cane in
his right hand. He bolted the door and gazed at her for
a moment with an expression of disgust. ‘I hear you
have learned to write. I don’t have to ask who has
taught you to do this. I know exactly who it is –
someone with no sense of responsibility. No, someone
with no sense at all. Why does a girl need to write? So
she can write to a pimp?’
He stepped forward and slapped her on her temple
with his left hand, then he swapped the cane and
slapped her on the face and head with his right hand.
The blows made her stagger and she reeled back as
he shouted and snarled at her. Then after a long silent
pause he lashed at her with the cane, deliberately
missing at first but coming ever closer. She yelled with
terror and did her best to escape but it was a small
room and he had bolted the door. There was nowhere
for her to hide so she ran and ducked and took what
blows she had to. Most of them landed on her back
and shoulders and made her shudder and cry out, and
in the end she stumbled and fell. As she did so she put
out her left hand to protect her face, and the stick
landed on it with crushing force. The pain took her
breath away and she gasped with shock before a
scream tore through her. She lay at his feet, screaming
and sobbing, while he raged at her and no one came
to stop him. When he had satisfied himself, he opened
the door and left the room.
Afterwards, through her tears and sobs, she knew that
her aunt came to her and took her soiled dress off and
wiped her down. Then she covered her with a sheet
and murmured to her until she passed out. It could
only have been momentary because when she came to
light still glared through the window and the room
throbbed with heat. She lay there all afternoon in a
tearful delirium, conscious at times that her aunt was
sitting against the wall nearby. In the evening she took
the girl to the herbalist to have her hand bound, and
the mganga told the woman: ‘You should be ashamed
of yourself. Everybody in the village heard him shouting
and beating the child. It’s as if he is out of his mind.’
‘He did not mean to hurt her like this. It was an
accident,’ her aunt said.
‘Do you think no one is keeping account?’ the mganga
said.
The herbalist did all she knew how to do but the hand
did not heal properly. Afiya had another hand, though,
and a few days after the beating she wrote a note on
a scrap of paper to the man her brother had
befriended in the town. She addressed the note care of
Bwana Biashara as he had instructed she was to do if
she needed help. She wrote: Kaniumiza. Nisaidie. Afiya.
He has hurt me. Help me. She gave the note to the
shopkeeper, who read it and folded it in half and gave
it to a cart driver headed for the coast. Her brother’s
friend came back with the cart driver who delivered her
note. He paid him to return the following day. She was
still sore all over from the bruises and the fractured
hand, and was sitting on the doorstep staring out at the
hill when they pulled up outside the house. The
shopkeeper had told them where to go. Her uncle was
at work but he did not come back. He must have
known who had arrived. It was only a small village.
When she saw her brother’s friend she rose to her
feet.
‘Afiya,’ he said, and came to her and saw how she
was. He took her good hand, walked her to the cart
without saying a word.
‘Wait,’ she said. She ran inside and picked up her
bundle, which was in the entranceway where she slept.
For a long time Afiya did not like to go anywhere in
case they came looking for her. She was afraid of
everyone except for her brother’s friend who had come
for her and whom she was now to call Baba Khalifa,
and Bi Asha, who fed her wheat porridge and fish soup
to build her strength, whom she was now to call
Bimkubwa. She was sure that if her Baba had not
come, her uncle would have killed her sooner or later,
or if not him then his son. But Baba Khalifa came.
TWO
3
He picked him out with his eyes during the inspection
on that first morning. The officer. That was in the boma
camp where they were taken to join the other recruits
who had been rounded up earlier. On the march from
the depot to the boma their escort hectored and
mocked and hurried them on, ahead and behind them
and sometimes beside them. You’re a bunch of
washenzi, they said. Feeble fodder for the wild beasts.
Don’t swing your hips like a shoga. We are not taking
you to a brothel. Straighten your shoulders, you
cocksuckers! The army will show you how to stiffen that
backside.
The recruits were on the march with varying degrees
of consent: some were volunteers, others were
volunteered by their elders who themselves were under
duress, some swept up or coerced by circumstances,
some picked up on the road. The schutztruppe was
expanding and was eager for fighting men. Some of
them talked freely, already swaggering with anticipation,
familiar with this kind of work, laughing at the bullying
words of their escort, eager to be admitted into the
language of scorn. Others were silent and anxious,
perhaps even fearful, not sure yet of what lay ahead.
Hamza was in the latter category, silently wretched
about what he had done. No one had forced him, he
had volunteered.
They started from the recruiting depot at first light. He
knew no one but to begin with he strutted with the
others, made bold by the strangeness of these
circumstances, out at dawn marching to the training
camp at the start of an adventure. The big muscular
men took the lead, striding confidently and pulling the
others along behind them. One of them broke into song,
his voice deep and gloaming, and some others who
knew his language took it up with him. Hamza thought
it was Kinyamwezi because that was what the men
looked like to him. Their escort, some of whom also
looked to be Wanyamwezi, smiled and even joined in at
times. In a lull someone began to sing another song in
Kiswahili. It was not really a song, more like a sung
conversation, delivered to a jaunty marching tempo with
an explosive response at the end of every phrase:
Tumefanya fungo na Mjarumani, tayari.
Tayari!
Askari wa balozi wa Mdachi, tayari.
Tayari!
Tutampigania bila hofu.
Bila hofu!
Tutawatisha adui wajue hofu.
Wajue hofu!
They sang cheerfully, half-mocking themselves with their
chest-thumping gestures:
We have joined the German,
We’re ready!
We’re soldiers of the governor of the Mdachi,
We’re ready!
We will fight for him without fear,
Without fear!
We will terrify our enemies and fill them with fear,
With fear!
Their escort laughed with them as they sang the
blustering words and added obscene lyrics of their own.
Then as they marched out into the countryside and
the heat rose and the sun clamped down on his neck
and shoulders, and the sweat poured off his face and
streamed down his back, Hamza’s anxiety returned. He
had volunteered on impulse, fleeing what had seemed
intolerable, but he was ignorant of what he had now
sold himself to, and of whether he was up to what it
would demand of him. He was not ignorant about the
company he had chosen to keep. Everyone knew about
the askari army, the schutztruppe, and their ferocity
against the people. Everyone knew about their
stone-hearted German officers. He had chosen to be
one of their soldiers, to get away, and as he sweated
and tired, and they marched along the dirt road in the
heat of the day, his anxiety about what he had done
surged so powerfully at times that he grew short of
breath.
They stopped for a drink of water and some dried figs
and dates. They passed many paths that led off the
road to villages just behind the screen of foliage but did
not see anyone. It seemed they were all keeping out of
sight. At one roadside, in a small clearing under a large
tamarind tree, there were bunches of bananas, a small
pile of cassava, a basket of cucumbers and another of
tomatoes. The market had been abandoned in a hurry.
People must have been surprised at their approach and
not been able to gather up all their merchandise in time,
opting for a safe retreat. Everyone knew the recruiting
squads were out in the countryside.
Their escort halted them there and called out for the
owners of the goods to appear but no one did. In the
meantime the escort distributed the bananas among the
marchers, only the bananas, and shouted out to the
concealed traders that they should present the bill to the
Kaiser’s governor. The marchers were not once allowed
out of sight of their escort. They were required to
relieve themselves by the roadside in sight of everyone,
six of them at a time, whether they needed to or not.
It’s to teach you discipline, their escort laughed. Get that
filthy stuff out of you before we march you into camp,
and cover it up with soil afterwards.
They walked all day, most of them barefoot, some
wearing leather sandals. The German built this road,
their escort said, just so you don’t have to struggle
through the jungle. Just so we can get you
sister-fuckers there in comfort. By mid-afternoon
Hamza’s legs and back ached so much that he walked
by rote and instinct, without any choice but to keep
moving. Later he could not remember the final stages of
that march, but like animals nearing their pens, the
recruits came to life when the escort told them they
were nearly there.
They arrived at the camp at dusk, walking through the
outskirts of a large village where a crowd gathered to
watch them trudge past. Friendly shouts and some
laughter followed them until they passed through the
gates into the walled boma. A long whitewashed building
ran along the right-hand side of the camp. The upstairs
rooms, some of which glowed with lamplight, had
verandas facing the open parade ground. At
ground-level beneath was a line of closed doors. There
was another smaller building, which ran along the far
side of the open ground facing the gate. It also had an
upper storey lit against the gloom. Downstairs there was
just one door and two windows, all of which were
closed. To the left of the wide parade ground were two
half-open sheds and some animal pens. In the corner
nearest the gate there was a small two-storey building
which, it turned out, was the lockup. That was where
they were taken and shown into one large downstairs
room with lamps hanging from the ceiling beams. The
door to upstairs was shut but theirs was left open as
was the main front door. The askari who had
accompanied them on the march stayed, still keeping an
eye on them, even though they themselves seemed
worn out by the march. They were too tired for
mockery and abuse, and sat by the door waiting for
their relief.
There were eighteen new recruits in their group, weary
and sweaty and silent now in the cramped cell. Hamza
was numb with hunger and exhaustion, his heart racing
with a distress he could not control. Three elderly
women from the village brought a clay pot of bananas
boiled with chopped tripe, which the marchers gathered
round to eat as best they could, taking turns to reach
in for a handful while the food lasted. When the relief
guards came they took the recruits out into the dark
one at a time to use the bucket latrine in an outhouse
to one side of the lockup. Afterwards the guards
selected two of the men to take the bucket to a cesspit
outside the gate and dispose of the waste.
‘Boma la mzungu,’ one of the guards said. ‘Kila kitu
safi. Hataki mavi yenu ndani ya boma lake. Hapana
ruhusa kufanya mambo ya kishenzi hapa.’ This is the
mzungu’s camp. Everything is clean here. He doesn’t
want your shit inside his boma. It is not allowed to
follow your savage ways here.
The boma gates were shut after that. By then it was
fully night although Hamza could hear the murmur of
the village outside the walls and then, to his surprise,
the muadhin calling people for the isha prayer. Later,
through the open door of the lockup, Hamza saw oil
lamps moving in the dark across the parade ground but
none of them approached. When he woke up during
the night, he saw the whitewashed building glowing in
the dark. The guards were nowhere in sight. It seemed
there was no one there to watch over them. Perhaps
they were outside, watching to see if they would get up
to any mischief, or perhaps they knew there was
nowhere safe for the new arrivals to go in the dead of
night.
In the morning they were lined up for inspection facing
the long white building. In daylight Hamza saw that it
had a tin roof painted grey and a raised wooden deck,
which ran all the way across the front of the building.
He could also see that the closed doors he had seen at
dusk were offices or stores. He counted seven doors
and eight shuttered windows. The windows and doors in
the middle of the block stood open. A flagpole was
planted somewhere near the middle of the open ground,
which he would later learn to call the Exerzierplatz.
The Nubi ombasha who had roused them and directed
them to the parade ground strode in front of them and
then behind, silently prodding with his sturdy bamboo
cane to straighten the line. They were all barefoot, even
those who had come in with sandals, and in their
everyday clothes, while the ombasha was in military
khaki, leather belt with ammunition pouches, studded
boots and a tarbush with an eagle emblem at the front
and a neck-shade. He was a man of mature years,
clean-shaven, lean and hard despite his paunch. His
teeth were stained the reddish-brown of a ghat-eater.
His face was glistening, unsmiling, stern and scarred on
both temples – the frightening deadpan face of the Nubi
askari.
When the ombasha was satisfied that the line was
straight and still, he turned towards the officer who had
appeared outside the open doorway of the middle office
in the building in front of which they were gathered. The
ombasha stiffened his spine and shouted out that the
swine were ready for inspection. Hawa schwein tayari.
The officer, who was also in khaki and wearing a
helmet, did not move immediately but raised his swagger
stick to acknowledge the ombasha. After the momentary
delay necessary for his dignity, he stepped down from
the raised deck and walked towards the recruits. He
started at one end of the line and proceeded slowly,
pausing for a longer look at some of the men but not
speaking. He tapped four in the line with his stick. The
ombasha had instructed them to stand still and look
straight ahead, and on no account – ever – to make
eye contact with a German officer. Hamza knew he had
already picked him out with his eyes. He had seen that
even before the officer moved from the doorway – a
slim clean-shaven man – and he could not prevent a
shiver when he stopped in front of him. He was not as
tall as he had looked on the deck but taller than
Hamza. He only stood in front of him for a few seconds
and then moved on but Hamza saw without looking that
his eyes were hard and almost transparent. He left
behind him an astringent medicinal smell.
Four of them were sent to the carrier corps office to
be recruited as stretcher-bearers or porters, the ones
the officer had tapped with his stick as he walked past.
Perhaps they were too old or looked slow, or simply did
not please the officer’s eye. He left the rest to the
direction of the ombasha. Hamza was confused and
terrified and wondered if he might have preferred the
carrier corps despite its degraded status. He knew that
was his cowardice speaking. The porters were not
spared the hardships of askari life, and in addition
walked about in rags and sometimes barefoot, derided
by everyone. The new recruits were marched a few feet
away and made to sit down on the ground in front of
the smaller building, whose central downstairs door was
now standing open. The other door at one end of the
building was padlocked top and bottom.
There were no trees anywhere near the perimeter
wall, and no shade on the parade ground. It was early
morning but because he had to sit still, the sun was
already unbearably hot on Hamza’s neck and head.
After many minutes another German officer came out of
the building, followed by a man in uniform who stood a
pace or two behind him. The German officer was plump,
dressed in knee-length trousers and a tunic with several
pockets. On his left upper arm he wore a white band
with a red cross on it. He had a florid complexion and
a very large brassy moustache and pale thin receding
hair, and the shorts, his girth and that big moustache
gave him a slightly comical air. After regarding them for
a long moment, he ordered them on to their feet, then
he told them to sit and then ordered them on to their
feet again. He smiled, said something to the man behind
him and went back inside. The assistant, also wearing a
white band with a red cross on it, nodded to the
ombasha and went back into the infirmary. They were
then sent in there one at a time for examination.
When it was Hamza’s turn he went into an airy, well-lit
room with six empty beds neatly made up. To one end
was a small sectioned-off consulting room with a folding
table set up to one side and an examination bed to the
other. The assistant, who was slim and short and
weather-beaten and had a look of experience and
cynicism, smiled at him and in Kiswahili asked his name,
his age, his home, his religion. He spoke to the officer in
German, his tone somehow sceptical about the
information he was conveying. The officer too considered
these details as he received them and glanced at
Hamza as if to check before he wrote them down on a
card. Hamza had lied about his age, claiming to be older
than he was.
‘Suruwali,’ the assistant said, indicating his trousers,
which Hamza reluctantly removed. ‘Haya schnell,’ the
officer said because Hamza was taking too long. He
leaned forward with some difficulty and took a good look
at Hamza’s genitals, then with a sudden upward
movement slapped him lightly on the testicles. He
chuckled when Hamza jumped with surprise, and shared
a smile with his assistant. Then he reached forward
again, and gently and repeatedly squeezed Hamza’s
penis in his hand until it began to stiffen. ‘Inafanya kazi,’
he said to the assistant – in good working order – but
the words came out clumsily, as if they were awkward
on his tongue or he had a speech impediment. He let
go of the penis, it seemed with some reluctance. The
officer then looked into Hamza’s eyes, made him open
his mouth and gripped him by the wrist for a short
while. Then he took a needle out of a metal tray,
unstoppered a small ampoule and dipped the needle in
the thick fluid. He briskly scratched Hamza’s upper arm
with the needle and put it in another dish, which held a
clear translucent liquid. The assistant then gave a Hamza
a pill to swallow down with a glass of water. He smiled
when Hamza flinched at its bitterness. In the meantime
the officer wrote some more on his card, looked at
Hamza for a long considering moment and then waved
him out, smiling slightly. That was his first encounter with
the medical officer.
They were given a uniform, a belt, boots and a fez.
The Nubi ombasha told them: ‘My name is Gefreiter
Haidar al-Hamad and I am the ombasha to train you
bil-askari. You will always behave with manners and you
will obey me. I have fought in the north and the south
and in the east and the west, for the English, for the
Khedive and now for the Kaiser. I am a man of honour
and experience. You are swine until I teach you
bil-askari. You are washenzi like all civilians until I teach
you bil-askari. You will remember every day that you
are fortunate to be askari. Respect and obey or wallahi
– you will see. Unafahamu? Everybody say this
together: Ndio bwana. Now, this uniform, these boots,
this belt, this fez … they are most important. You wear
them well na keep them clean. Clean every day, this is
your first duty, bil-askari. Every day you have to check
your uniform, boots, belt, and everything else is check.
If is not clean you will suffer kiboko na matusi in front
of everyone, hamsa ishirin. You know what this is?
Twenty-five strokes of the cane on your fat buttocks.
When you reach askari khasa, you will wear a tarbush
like me. I will teach you and you will keep clean or
wallahi – you will know. Keep your equipment clean.
Unafahamu?’
‘Ndio bwana.’
He explained in detail how each item was to be worn
and cared for. He spoke harshly in different languages,
Kiswahili, Arabic and some German, his utterances
broken and incomplete. He added to them with signs
and gestures that were impossible to misunderstand and
repeated himself until they all nodded to show they
understood. Ndio bwana. ‘Shabash. This is the language
of the camp, unafahamu,’ the ombasha said, waving his
cane in the air at them. ‘If you don’t understand
something, this will explain.’
They were housed in a barracks block in the village
just outside the walls of the boma. After that first
morning their lives were taken over by exhausting daily
training, which began with a bugle call at first light and
went on until noon. The sessions were held inside the
boma and were led by the Nubi ombasha at first, the
Gefreiter Haidar al-Hamad then taken over by the
shaush, Unteroffizier Ali Nguru Hassan, also a Nubi, a
frowning ascetic-looking man who was hard to please.
Only later, after they had been training for several days,
did they come to meet the German subaltern Feldwebel
Walther.
The Feldwebel was tall and solidly built, with a loud
booming voice. He was dark-haired with a large
moustache and brown eyes that bulged and swelled
when he was irate or displeased. His lips twisted
scornfully with almost every utterance he made. His
training sessions were energetic and exacting, and he
found much in their performance to irritate him. He kept
them hard at work when he was in charge, hands
cocked on his hips as he rebuked them in foul and
abusive language, which poured out of him like sewage
down a gutter. Even when he was silent, he struggled
to contain his exasperation. He was everything Hamza
had expected in a German officer. He carried a swagger
stick all the time, which he tapped against his right leg
impatiently, sometimes quite hard. Otherwise he only
used the stick to point with or to swish through the air
with great violence when his anger grew too intense to
control. It was beneath the dignity of a German officer
to strike an askari, and he expected the ombasha, who
was present at all the sessions, to step in with blows
when his words needed emphasising.
The day began with a dose of quinine followed by
marching drills for several hours. It was important for
the schutztruppe to make a good display, the Feldwebel
bellowed at them, and marching precision was essential
to that. They learned how to hold their bodies military
fashion, and later how to march as individuals in front of
each other and then as a group while the ombasha or
the shaush or the Feldwebel shouted orders and abuse.
After that they learned to hold and to use their
weapons, how to lie on the ground while taking aim,
how to shoot and hit the target, how to move at speed
and reload. Schutztruppe askari did not retreat unless
ordered to, did not panic under attack and were
steadfast above all else. Unafahamu? Every order was
shouted and accompanied by abuse. Ndio bwana. Every
error was punished by violence or hard labour,
according to its severity. Punishment was constant and
public, and every few days the whole troop, recruits and
veteran askari alike, were marched into the boma to
witness the hamsa ishirin, the twenty-five lashes, a public
flogging for one misdemeanour or another, which often
did not seem deserving of such humiliation. It was to
make them obedient and fearless, the ombasha told
them. The flogging was always carried out by an African
askari, never a German.
In the afternoons they tidied the boma and their
barrack building, and performed other duties as
instructed. They cleaned their weapons, their shoes and
leggings, their uniforms. There were many inspections
and every blemish was punished, either individually or
sometimes as a whole group. They performed physical
exercises to strengthen their bodies, running, forced
marches and body-building drills. Most of the recruits in
Hamza’s group were from the local area and understood
each other, but other languages were spoken in the
troop: Arabic, Kinyamwezi and German mostly. Words
from all these languages were churned up together with
Kiswahili, some form of which was the main language of
the troops.
Hamza lost himself in the exhausting routine. In the
first rush of panic after joining up he had feared that
he would be scorned and bullied by men who were
used to violence and held only strength and toughness
in high esteem. An order soon became evident in his
group, and strength and agility was part of that. The
enthusiasm and power of two among them, Komba and
Fulani, marked them out as natural leaders and no one
contested that right. Fulani had some military experience
already although not of the schutztruppe calibre. He was
a Mnyamwezi who had worked as a guard in a
merchant’s private army, and it was the merchant who
named him Fulani, which means So-and-so, because he
could never remember his Kinyamwezi name. Fulani liked
the dash of this name and embraced it. Komba was
very strong-looking and confident, a natural athlete.
These two led in all the drills, chatted up the women
who brought their food, traded innuendos with them and
promised to visit them later in the evening. They were
always served first and served plentifully. They were the
ones the ombasha always praised and the Feldwebel
fawned over and then reserved his worst abuse for.
Komba laughed at the Feldwebel behind his back and
called him Jogoo, the Cockerel. He strutted like one
whenever the women were around. They all understood
that the Feldwebel’s assault on the two men, and
Komba in particular, was a recognition of their primacy
in the troop. He had to overpower them to establish his
own authority without diminishing them. Hamza shuffled
to defer to that order and find his own place in it, as
did the rest of the troop.
The ascendancy of Fulani and Komba did not seem
important or a problem to Hamza because it was the
intensity of the training and the general fear of
punishment that mostly preoccupied the group. No one
had any answer to the scorn and violence of the
Gefreiter or the Unteroffizier, and especially not to that
of Feldwebel Walther. None of the instructors was
addressed by name or addressed at all, just obeyed
with as much alacrity as possible. Only Komba managed
to get away with anything because he was an insolent
dandy who made it seem that he was not conscious of
causing offence or was far from intending disrespect.
Nevertheless, despite the harsh regime, Hamza found
unexpected satisfaction in his own growing strength and
skills, and after a while he no longer winced at the
shouts of schwein and washenzi or the German words
he did not yet understand, which their trainers spat at
them constantly. Unexpectedly, he began to feel pride at
being part of the group, not rejected and mocked as
he had feared, but there to share in the punishing
routines and the exhaustion and the grumbling, to feel
his body becoming stronger and responding skilfully to
commands, to march with the precision his instructors
demanded. It took him longer to get used to the rank
smell of exhausted sleeping bodies and the gases they
expelled. The banter was brutal but everyone suffered
from it and Hamza learned to take his share and keep
his head down. When they started going out on
manoeuvres he saw the terror of the villagers when the
askari arrived and could not suppress a thrill of pleasure
at their fright.
The officer remained a distant figure after that first
morning. Their morning training was often conducted on
the boma parade ground, the Exerzierplatz, and the
officer sometimes came out to watch them. He did not
step down from the raised wooden deck or stay
watching for long. More often he was away from the
boma on field manoeuvres with the regular units. They
learned from the other askari that these were called
shauri missions, consultation meetings to explain
government policy or to hand out judgements on
disputes or to carry out punishments on villages and
chiefs who had offended. When their unit joined a shauri
mission for training, Hamza realised there was not much
consultation involved. The manoeuvres were to discipline
and terrify the stupid washenzi villagers and make them
obey government instructions without questioning them.
After they had been training for several weeks, the
officer stepped down from the deck one morning and
approached them. The moment seemed prearranged as
all three of their training officers were in attendance, the
Gefreiter Haidar al-Hamad, the Unteroffizier Ali Nguru
Hassan and Feldwebel Walther. They were in full regalia
as was the officer in his gleaming white garrison uniform.
The ombasha had explained that those among their
group who were scheduled for special training in the
signals detachment or the band would be selected during
this parade. One of their number played the trumpet,
although none of them had heard him, and he intended
to apply to join the musikkapelle. He asked the
ombasha’s permission to put himself forward. Selection
for the signals detachment required the ability to read,
but although Hamza could read he had not put himself
forward for that. He had chosen not to do so,
concerned not to draw any attention to himself, but
Haidar the ombasha had seen him reading aloud to the
others from the government Kiswahili newspaper Kiongozi
during one of their rest periods. When he was explaining
to them the selection process that would take place
during the parade, the ombasha glanced towards Hamza
as he mentioned the signals detachment.
The officer walked along the line as he had done that
first morning, only this time he stopped in front of each
of them in turn for a detailed inspection. At the end of
this he stood a few feet in front of the troop, which
stood to attention. The Feldwebel called out the
trumpeter’s name, which was Abudu, and he stood
forward two steps as instructed. Then he called out
Hamza’s name and he did the same. The officer saluted
and walked back to his office. The troop marched off,
leaving Abudu and Hamza standing in the Exerzierplatz.
They stood to attention as ordered while the
late-morning sun beat on them. They both knew this
was another punishing test and that if they moved or
spoke there would be an unpleasant punishment to
follow and the end of any further training. To Hamza it
seemed a cruel caprice to no purpose but it was too
late for such wisdom and there was nothing else to do
but endure.
It was difficult to tell how long they stood to attention
in the late-morning sun, a quarter of an hour maybe,
but after some time ombasha Haidar returned and
instructed Abudu to follow him while Hamza remained
standing in the Exerzierplatz. Then it was his turn, and
he marched ahead of the ombasha as instructed up to
the open door of the office where he was momentarily
blinded by the deep shade. Herein, a voice spoke from
within. It was the first time he had heard the officer’s
voice, and Hamza felt its severity through his sinews. He
stepped into a large office with two windows at the front
and a desk at the end facing the door. There was a
chair in front of the desk and another small table set
against the wall on which stood a draughtsman’s board.
The officer was sitting behind the desk, leaning back in
his chair. His face was leaner without his helmet and
there was a wrinkle of the skin on his left upper cheek
and temple below the hairline. His eyes were a piercing
blue.
After a long deliberate silence the officer spoke in
German and the ombasha translated. ‘The Oberleutnant
asks if you want to be signalman.’
‘Yes, sir,’ Hamza said loudly, addressing the air above
the officer’s head and speaking with as much conviction
as he could. He did not know if being a signalman was
any safer than being an askari but it was not the
moment to quibble.
The officer spoke again briefly. ‘Why?’ the ombasha
translated.
Hamza had not thought of an answer to this question
although he should have done. After a moment’s
thought he said, ‘To learn a new skill and to serve the
schutztruppe as well as I can.’
He glanced quickly at the officer and saw that he
smiled. It was Hamza’s first sight of the sneer he would
come to know well. ‘Can you read?’ the ombasha
translated again.
‘I can read a little.’
The officer made an interrogative face, asking him to
clarify. Hamza did not know how to add to that. He
knew all the letters and with patience could make out
words if they were in Kiswahili. He was not sure if that
was what the officer wanted to know so he stared
above his head and said nothing. The officer spoke in
German, speaking slowly and looking at the ombasha
who waited until he had finished and then translated.
The words came out in the Nubi’s usual mangled style
and because Hamza stood facing the officer, he saw on
the edge of his vision that he winced slightly at times at
the ombasha’s excesses. It was said that the officer
spoke the best Kiswahili of all the Germans.
‘The Oberleutnant say why you don’t learn more to
read? Why you don’t read everything like he can?
Everything he put in front of you, kelb, and you don’t
learn. You have no civilisation, that is why you savage.
He say you must learn. What word he say …messatik …
something like that. You don’t know that.’
‘Mathematics,’ the officer said.
‘Yes, mesthamatik, you don’t know that, you kelb, you
savage dog,’ the ombasha said.
‘Nini jina la mathematics kwa lugha yako?’ the officer
asked, doing without the ombasha after all. What is the
word for mathematics in your language? ‘Do you know
what mathematics is? You can’t understand anything of
the world’s learning without mathematics, not music or
philosophy, let alone the mechanics of signalling.
Unafahamu?’
‘Ndio bwana,’ Hamza said loudly.
‘You don’t even know what mathematics is, do you?
We have come here to bring you this, mathematics and
many other clever things that you would not have
without us. This is our Zivilisierungmission,’ the officer
said, and then gestured with his left arm towards the
window at the boma outside, his lean face and thin lips
creased in a sardonic smile. ‘This is our cunning plot,
which only a child could misunderstand. We have come
here to civilise you. Unafahamu?’
‘Ndio bwana.’
The officer spoke Kiswahili carefully, searching for the
right vocabulary, but it was as if he was performing a
language he had no control over, as if he had the
words but not their emotion, wanting them to speak in
a way they were not suited to. His eyes had a watchful
light, which wavered between curiosity and scorn,
constantly looking to see the effect his words had on
Hamza. He in turn studied the officer as best he could
without making eye contact. At other times, as he was
to learn later, those eyes held the bright glitter of a
man capable of violence.
‘Only I don’t think you will ever learn mathematics. It
requires a mental discipline you people are not capable
of. That’s enough for now,’ the officer said abruptly, and
waved them out of his office.
Hamza found out later that day that he had been
assigned as the officer’s personal servant, his batman,
and was required to report to his residence first thing in
the morning to be instructed in his duties by the
outgoing batman. His request for a posting to the signals
detachment was refused. He was not told why. Komba
led the mockery when the assignment became known.
‘You are a shoga,’ he said, ‘that’s why he picked you.
He wants someone sweet and pretty to massage his
back and serve his dinner for him. It gets cold up there
in the mountains, and he will need someone to keep
him warm at night, just like a little wife. What are you
doing here? Anyone can see you are too pretty to be a
soldier.’
‘These Germans, they like playing with pretty young
men, especially ones with such nice manners as you
have. Kwa hisani yako,’ Fulani said, waving his hand and
softening his voice. If you please.
‘Yes, what a dreamy little beauty you are,’ Komba
said, reaching out as if to stroke Hamza’s cheek.
Others joined in, pretending to be him, walking with
extravagant effeminacy as they play-acted serving food
and massaging a back. ‘When the German tires of you,
you can always come back and stroke my back,’
someone said. It was a long time before they tired of
the game and left him alone. By then Hamza was
silently cringing with humiliation and fearful that their
predictions of what was to befall him would turn out to
be true. He had felt himself one of them, had shared
their privations and punishments, and no one among
them had spoken to him in such a slighting way before.
It was as if they were forcibly expelling him from their
midst.
4
They had no word from Ilyas but that was nothing to
worry about, Khalifa said. ‘Dar es Salaam is a long way
away. We should not expect to hear for a while. We’ll
get news when someone comes from Dar es Salaam or
perhaps he’ll send us a note. Sooner or later we’ll hear
from him.’
In the early days when she went to live with
Bimkubwa and Baba Khalifa, Afiya slept on a thin kapok
mattress on the floor in the same room as they did.
There was a room in the backyard that was used as a
store. The basket of charcoal was kept in there, and
some old pots and sticks of furniture, which were bound
to come in useful one day. Khalifa said he would clean it
up and prepare it for her. It would need a coat of
limewash to kill off the bugs but should be a
comfortable room after that. There was another store
room at the front of the house with its own door. ‘We
can move the junk in there,’ Khalifa said. ‘There’s no
hurry. First let her get used to us here. She is only a
little girl. Let her get over her fears.’
‘She is not a baby,’ Bi Asha said, but did not insist.
Afiya was still feverish and her hand pained her,
although a little less each day. Bi Asha took her to a
bone-setter who massaged the hand and then put it in
a cast made from herbs and flour and eggs. ‘It will help
the bones to heal,’ he said. He took it off after a few
days and taught her exercises to improve the hand’s
movement. He told Bi Asha, ‘I don’t know if she will get
full use of it back. It may be there is permanent
damage to the fibres in the hand.’
Bi Asha prayed for her and taught her to read the
Koran. If we read together then you will not be thinking
so much about your pain and God will bless you and
reward you, she said. It took several weeks of daily
effort for Afiya to advance enough in her learning to
manage the small suras, but when she did, Bi Asha
sent her to one of the neighbours, Bi Habiba, who gave
lessons in her home to four other girls every morning.
Bi Asha thought the company of other children would
make Afiya learn better. To Khalifa she confided that she
had doubts that Bi Habiba was much of a teacher. The
little girls knew how to exploit her lenient ways and
avoid their lessons by tricking her into telling them
stories.
‘What stories?’ Khalifa asked. He liked stories.
‘I don’t know,’ Bi Asha said tetchily, knowing that he
had missed the point. ‘I expect they are stories about
the Prophet and his companions, but they should be
practising reading. That’s what I am paying her for.’
‘Oh, good stories,’ Khalifa said, exasperating Bi Asha
who thought she heard something slighting in his tone.
She was often irritated by his deliberate show of
indifference to matters of piety.
‘Yes, I hope good stories,’ she said. ‘Do you think I
am paying for her to go and listen to gossip?’
‘You’re probably not paying enough for gossip,’ he
said, pleased with his own wit.
As the weeks passed, Afiya read more fluently and her
hand healed enough for her to help with chores in the
house after the class, which was for two hours or so
first thing in the morning. When she came back from Bi
Habiba’s she gave an account of what she read that
morning and sometimes had to give a demonstration to
Bimkubwa. After that Afiya accompanied her to the
market to buy vegetables and fruit, and perhaps meat
on meat-eating days. Bi Asha taught her the cost of
produce and how to pay for it, how to handle the
money. When you are old enough, you’ll go shopping
for me, she said. Sometimes they passed the house of
the merchant Nassor Biashara and saw Khalifa sitting at
his desk in the office, facing the open door. The office
was a downstairs room in the merchant’s house. He
and his family lived upstairs. Later in the morning every
day, after their return from the market, a man came
around from house to house selling fresh fish out of a
basket. He bought from the fishermen on the beach to
save his customers from having to go there and haggle
among the scales and fish guts. Afiya learned how to
prepare the fish: to crush the garlic and the ginger and
the chillies on the grinding stone and rub the paste over
and inside the flesh. She could grind the paste with one
hand while steadying the stone with the other, even
though she could not grip properly with her left hand. In
this as in many other ways she learned to cope with
her injury.
She went to see the family with whom she used to
lodge when she lived with Ilyas, the sisters Jamila and
Saada and their mother. They were pleased to see her
and welcomed her as kindly as they had done before.
They noticed her awkwardness with the hand and asked
about it. She told them that her uncle beat her because
she had learned to write and the mother said such
ignorance was a sin. The elder of the sisters, Jamila,
was betrothed by now but her father said she was too
young to marry and must wait until she was eighteen,
otherwise her life would be ruined by child-bearing when
she had not even had her youth. Jamila said she was
happy at home and did not mind waiting, nor did her
fiancé. He lived in Zanzibar and they had only met
once, so did not know each other well enough for
Jamila to miss him. They asked about Ilyas and Afiya
said she had no news. May God keep him safe, the
mother said. Whenever I go past your old room
downstairs I think of you two living there.
Khalifa came home for lunch every day, which was
served immediately after Bi Asha said the midday
prayers. Afiya was required to accompany her in prayer
but Khalifa usually managed to arrive just after they
finished. At first Bi Asha said the ritual words aloud so
that Afiya could hear and repeat them. In prayer, she
explained to her, a person is speaking directly to God
and cannot break off to address someone else or do
something else. So she could not stop to explain and
instruct during the prayer and Afiya would have to learn
by example and repetition. After lunch Khalifa pottered
around their bedroom in his shirt and kikoi, and then
stretched himself out on a mat for an afternoon nap. Bi
Asha did the same in the bed and Afiya was left to
amuse herself. She liked these quiet hours in the middle
of the day when the streets themselves seemed to fall
silent in the heat. She washed up the pots, cleaned the
braziers and swept the backyard. Then she sat in a
corner of the yard with her slate or scraps of paper
and practised writing or else read from the Koran Bi
Asha bought her. Everyone should have her own copy,
she said, not even glancing at Khalifa who had long ago
mislaid his.
The muadhin’s call to the afternoon prayer was the
signal for the adults to get up, Khalifa to have a quick
wash and return to work for two hours or so, and Bi
Asha to do a few chores in the house and then go out
to call on neighbours or receive them. One day Khalifa
asked Afiya if she wanted to come to the office with
him or if she preferred visiting with the neighbours, so
she went with him. There were three desks in the
office, the large room open to the road that Bi Asha
and she passed on their way to market. The desk in
the middle, facing the door, was Baba Khalifa’s. The one
to the right of the door was the merchant Nassor
Biashara’s whom Afiya was meeting for the first time
today although she had heard him spoken of a great
deal as the greedy scoundrel or, more sarcastically, as
our rich merchant. She expected to see someone very
much older than he was, with mean and miserly
features.
She was installed at the desk to the left of the door
with a pencil and some scrap paper that Baba Khalifa
found for her. Sometimes men came in to talk or do
business, but mostly to catch up with the latest news
and gossip. For most people it was the only way of
keeping track of what was going on in the world. The
visitors often said something about her. I see you have
a new clerk, or I see someone in this office who looks
as if she knows what she is doing. She listened to their
talk of politics and government crises while she
pretended to be busy with her scratchings. Their talk
was often about the coming war and the ferocity of the
schutztruppe, of whom they spoke with a mixture of
repugnance and admiration. They are animals, those
askari, she heard them say. She asked Khalifa if they
were the same askari Ilyas went to fight with or if they
were different.
‘They are the same but also different,’ Khalifa said.
‘Not all of them are the fierce brutes the men were
talking about. Some of them are policemen or clerks or
medical orderlies, some even play music in a band. I
think Ilyas will be one of those others. We are sure to
have word from him soon. He must have finished his
training by now and he will come home for a few days
then, no doubt. We can ask him when we see him.’
The merchant did not usually say much to her. He
was often busy with his ledgers and his letters or with
his visitors, and in any case was not much of a talker.
When there was talking going on, he was usually the
listener while his visitors and Baba held forth. He wore
wire-framed glasses when he wrote and Afiya had not
seen anyone wearing these before. Unaware of what
she was doing, she once stood staring at him as he
worked. She wondered if it hurt to wear them, the way
the handles curled behind his ears. Nassor Biashara
eventually looked up and pushed the glasses to the top
of his head. He rubbed his eyes for a few seconds then
sat back and gazed at her.
‘What are you staring at?’ he asked.
She pointed to his glasses and Khalifa said sharply,
‘Don’t point at someone’s face like that.’
The merchant spoke just as sharply. ‘Leave her alone,’
he said, and then she understood that he disliked Baba
Khalifa just as much as Baba disliked him.
She had a fit of coughing in the office one day, and
Nassor Biashara looked towards her with a frown of
concern. Come with me, he said when her coughing did
not stop. The door to their residence upstairs was just
next to the office and he stood at the bottom of the
stairs and called up, ‘Khalida, Afiya is coming up for
some water.’ That was how she met the merchant’s
wife, and after that whenever she went to the office
with Baba Khalifa, which was not every day, she went
upstairs for a drink of water and sometimes a slice of
rice cake. Khalida had a young baby and did not go
out much, so she often had visitors, her friends and
neighbours, wives and relatives of other merchants and
the people who worked for them. They sat with her in
their perfumed kangas and rustling chiffon dresses and
talked about weddings and births and bequeathings.
Afiya listened open-mouthed as they mocked people with
vicious delight: men who swaggered with conceit, women
who gave themselves airs, dignitaries whom rumour
exposed as hypocrites, some living and some already
passed on. They spared their own husbands and their
relatives, but were merciless with anyone else they
brought into their conversations. She did not bother to
pretend that she was not listening. They laughed at her
avid attention and warned each other, with winks and
raised eyebrows and some coded words, not to say too
much in front of the little girl. She knew when they
were talking about something they did not want her to
know – some people in this room have big ears –
because they hummed and coughed and spoke in a
roundabout way and used hand signals, laughing among
themselves as they played these games. She generally
worked out what they were trying to hide from her
although she pretended not to. It was a long time
before she realised that not everything they said about
other people was true.
In this way Afiya filled her time: the class with Bi
Habiba, which was in the hallway of her tiny house, the
stories she told them of miraculous events befalling the
Prophets of God, from Nabi Musa to Nabi Ibrahim to
Nabi Issa, and above all to the Messenger of God,
salallahuwaale. She visited Jamila and Saada and their
mother, sat in the merchant’s office while the men
talked and she wrote and drew on her scraps of paper,
and then went upstairs to see the merchant’s wife
Khalida and her friends and eat rice cake as she
listened to their slanders. She did not think it at the
time but later she knew that it was a period of
contentment for her, those first months when she came
to live with Bimkubwa and Baba Khalifa.
*
The junk in the room in the backyard was finally
removed to the store at the front of the house.
Afterwards the walls were limewashed and the floor was
swept and washed with soapy water and the window
frame was varnished and the bars were painted.
‘In the time before, my father used to keep trade
goods in that store at the front of the house,’ Bi Asha
said. ‘Our tajiri Nassor has asked to keep his rubbish in
there but I said no. He would want to lock it and keep
the key. That would be the beginning – first the store
then the yard and then the whole house – and after
that we would be out on the street. Nothing is beyond
that scoundrel. What trade goods did my father keep in
there? Whatever turned up. Everyone traded with
whatever came their way: sacks of rice going cheap,
which can be sold on, maize or millet after a good
harvest to be shipped on, metal trays, rosewater, dates.
Some of the goods were from here and some from
across the sea. One year he bought dozens of clay
water-pots from India, no one knew why. They
remained in the store for years, and I don’t know what
happened to them in the end. My father was not a
very good trader and somehow always managed to
make wrong decisions, buy or sell at the wrong time, or
at the wrong price. Anyway, he did not make any
money, my poor father, and then he let Uncle Amur
steal this house from him.’
A new bed with a mosquito-net frame was delivered
from Nassor Biashara’s workshop as a gift to Afiya from
the merchant. The mattress-maker came and unstitched
the worn-out mattress she slept on on the floor and
filled it with new kapok. A new net was ordered from
the tailor and hung glowing white in its frame. For the
first time in her life, at the age of twelve, Afiya had the
unexpected luxury of a room of her own. She found it
a little frightening at first in her little room in the yard,
but she did not say so. She bolted her door and kept
one of the window casements slightly ajar as instructed.
Then she tucked in the ends of her mosquito net and
gradually learned to ignore the sinister rustlings that
teemed in the dark.
‘You don’t know how lucky you are,’ Bi Asha told her,
but she was smiling, not scolding. ‘I hope we are not
spoiling you with all these comforts.’
Khalifa began to talk about how at the same age he
was sleeping on a mat under the stairs in his teacher’s
house with several other boys and how it was worth it
in the end, but Bi Asha cut him off. He is starting with
his Indian stories again, she said. Khalifa smiled
indulgently and went to lie down after lunch.
One morning, as Afiya was on her way to Bi Habiba’s
Koran class, Bi Asha gave her a kanga and showed her
how to wear it. You are growing up now. To preserve
decency you must cover yourself when you go out, she
said.
She knew her nipples ached and were swelling and
had noticed that men’s eyes fell to her chest when she
walked in the streets. She realised also that Nassor
Biashara preferred that she should go upstairs while his
male visitors were in the office. She thought it
embarrassed him the way they looked at her. She knew
what was happening without anyone explaining it to her,
and she accepted the kanga gratefully and covered
herself as she was told.
5
The officer had the two-room apartment at one end of
the upstairs block on the right-hand side of the boma. It
had a small bedroom and another room with two
comfortable chairs and a small desk where the officer
sometimes sat down to write. There were seven rooms
upstairs altogether, a replica of the downstairs layout,
and there was a hierarchy to the arrangement. The two
rooms at one end for the use of the commanding
officer stood next to a large room in the middle of the
block that was the mess, then came a room for each
of the other four officers, beginning with the medical
officer and ending with the Feldwebel, who had the small
room at the far end because he was the lowest in
rank. The other three officers in the boma had their
rooms in the smaller building facing the gate, whose
downstairs served as the infirmary and the padlocked
store. The store contained provisions for the officers’
mess: tins of European delicacies and bottles of beer
and wine and schnapps and brandy. The arrangements
in both blocks were very orderly. The washrooms for
both were downstairs in separate buildings. The sleeping
quarters for the men who served the officers were in a
two-roomed outhouse behind the blocks with an
attached washroom that they shared. Hamza and Julius,
who served the other four officers in their block, shared
one room, and the two who served the smaller block
shared the other.
Julius was much older than Hamza, in his late thirties.
He was the senior orderly and had served in the
schutztruppe for more than ten years. He could speak a
little German and understood a lot more. He was the
only one of them who was allowed in the provisions
store, the key to which was held by the officer in
charge of supplies. Julius was given that responsibility
because he could write, he explained to the others. If
he took anything from the store, he had to enter it into
the book kept in there. He told Hamza about his
mission education in Bagamoyo but chose to be
imprecise about how long he had been in school. He
was proud of his education and his religion. Now and
then he would say: If like me you were educated and
a Christian, you would think differently about whatever.
Julius was slightly wounded in a tax raid on a village
and his commanding officer posted him to batman’s
duties while he recovered. ‘This is my third year and no
one has thought to move me so I must be doing it
well,’ he said.
The water did not run upstairs, not yet, although there
were plans to introduce it, so in the morning Hamza
filled the officer’s washbasin with fresh water and then
went to fetch his coffee from the cooking shed. The
officers’ meals were cooked in a shed inside the boma
by women from the village, all of whom were wives of
askari. By the time Hamza came back the officer was
out of his inner room and dressed in his shirt and
trousers, waiting for his coffee to arrive. Hamza then
went into the inner room to make the bed and
straighten out his clothes, often feeling the officer’s eyes
on him through the open door. After that he went to
the mess to help Julius set the table for breakfast. The
officers from both blocks ate their breakfast in the mess
and met there for a formal dinner every evening. Julius
explained the crockery and cutlery required and the
rudiments of serving at table. Then they went downstairs
to wait for the men who served the smaller block to
deliver breakfast from the kitchen shed and after that
Hamza and Julius laid it out in their mess and called for
the officers.
After breakfast they cleared and washed the dishes,
which were for the exclusive use of the officers, put
them away in the cupboards, cleaned the mess and
then saw to the private rooms. Hamza tidied and dusted
and aired the officer’s apartment, emptied and cleaned
the washbasin and the chamber pot, then swept the
veranda front and back and took the soiled linen in its
own named bag downstairs for the laundrywoman to
collect. It was a very orderly routine and he was
expected to be all done by seven in the morning.
In the first few weeks of his new posting as the
officer’s personal servant, he joined his troop in their drill
session soon after seven because he had not completed
his initial training. He saw them in the Exerzierplatz
earlier than that, being put through their paces by the
ombasha or the shaush while he swept the veranda or
ironed the officer’s tunic and he longed to join them.
When he could, he threw himself into the drill in an
attempt to shake off the sense of unworthiness his
intimate servitude to the officer made him feel.
Sometimes they went out to the field for target practice
or manoeuvres but he could not join them if they were
going far. Just before noon he had to rush away to
clean up and be ready to serve lunch to any officers
who were eating in the mess on that day. By lunchtime
it was often too hot to linger, and the officers bolted
their food and hurried away to their rooms to rest until
it was cooler. To Hamza this was a blessed part of the
day when the boma and all the surrounding buildings in
the settlement subsided and fell silent. Even the goats
and the dogs in the village flopped down in a shady
corner and panted the hot hours away. He took his
time in the mess and on the back veranda because it
was coolest there at that time of day, and when he
retreated to the shared room downstairs he usually
found Julius already asleep.
At approximately four in the afternoon, as the muadhin
was calling people to the alasiri prayer in the settlement
mosque outside the boma, Hamza took a cup of coffee
to the officer who by then would have showered and
gone to his office. The Oberleutnant instructed him to
stay nearby and his post was outside on the deck,
sitting on a stool, within earshot if needed. This was the
routine every afternoon. He was sent on various errands
to the other officers or was asked to provide whatever
additional acts of comfort the officer required: a glass of
water, a cup of coffee or a fresh towel. From the
beginning, at some point in those afternoon hours, the
officer called Hamza in and taught him German, probably
to amuse himself at first but also because Hamza
proved to be such a willing learner. It began with
naming things.
‘Fenster. You say it,’ the officer said, pointing to the
window. ‘Tür, you say it. Stuhl, Auge, Herz, Kopf.’ Door,
chair, eye, heart, head, pointing or touching himself as
he spoke.
Then Hamza had to repeat whole sentences: ‘Mein
Name ist Siegfried. No no, you say your name. Mein
Name ist Hamza. Sie sind herzlich willkommen in meinem
Land. You say it, but you have to say like you believe
it. Sie sind herzlich willkommen in meinem Land. That’s
good. You say it very well. It means you are welcome
to my country,’ the officer said with his sneering smile.
Then he sent Hamza to the draughtsman’s table on
which a book of field instructions was open with a blank
sheet of paper beside it. He made him copy a few lines
so that he could familiarise himself with writing German
words. Every day he wrote a few which he then had to
read aloud without at first knowing what they meant. At
every opportunity the officer spoke to him in German,
which at times he found amusing, and Hamza
exaggerated his bafflement to make his superior laugh.
If Hamza did not understand something, the officer
translated it but the next time he expected him to
understand and reply. Sometimes the officer played
tricks on him and made him repeat self-mocking words
before laughing and explaining them. It was a game for
the officer, and it pleased him that Hamza was so
responsive and quick. I will have you reading Schiller
soon, he said, his eyes alight with mischief.
His eyes. Sometimes while Hamza was making the bed
or sweeping the front veranda or ironing a shirt, he
glanced round to find those transparent blue eyes fixed
immovably on him. The first time it happened, he
thought the officer had said something and was waiting
for a reply, but the eyes did not move and the lips did
not open. Then Hamza moved away in confusion,
troubled by the intensity of those eyes. He came to
sense a certain stillness at times when he was near the
officer, and knew that if he looked, he would find those
eyes fixed on him in that same way. It was an insolent
and intrusive inspection, leaving him with no choice but
to allow himself to be scrutinised at such length, to be
viewed as if he were incapable of returning that gaze.
He learned not to look.
His success at learning to speak and read a little
German delighted the officer. He displayed Hamza’s
achievements to the other officers in the mess, especially
during and after their evening meals, when they had
beer and schnapps to drink. He invited them to speak
to Hamza, to try him out. The medical officer smiled
benignly and looked him up and down as if searching
for some evidence of his facility for German on his
body. The other two officers in his block joined more
willingly in their superior officer’s game and asked the
simple friendly questions an adult might address to a
child. Wie alt sind Sie? The other officers laughed and
added comments Hamza did not understand, which
amused them even more. Feldwebel Walther was not
amused by the officers’ new game and snorted
dismissively, later whispering in an angry mocking tone
words that Hamza did not know but which, from the
tone they were uttered in, he guessed were obscene or
scornful. Julius smiled patronisingly during these exercises
and told him afterwards that the officers were making a
monkey out of him. Hamza left as soon as he could, to
get away from their condescension and before the
drinking and hilarity turned ugly.
‘Don’t take any notice of the Feldwebel,’ Julius told him.
‘He is a low-class man who should not be staying in the
same building as these honourable officers. He smokes
too much bangi then he goes chasing women in the
village outside. His room stinks of smoke.’
Sometimes the drinking sessions went on late, perhaps
when one of the officers was due to leave on a mission
to discipline a village or a chief, or to go on an
extended field manoeuvre. Then their voices and
laughter could be heard all over the boma, and the
Oberleutnant would be wracked by headaches the
following morning, gripping his temples with outstretched
fingers while his eyes were screwed up in agony. He
always suffered like that after the late nights.
One afternoon Hamza came into the office with coffee
and greeted the commanding officer as he was required
to in German, but he was so engaged in what he was
reading that he did not reply. The papers he held in his
hand had the look of an official document, and Hamza
saw the government crest on the top of the page.
Eventually the officer noticed Hamza and waved him out
of the office, and he did not call him back for their
usual half-hour conversation class. When he came in to
collect the coffee cup, the officer was leaning back in his
chair with a vacant look in his eyes, deep in thought.
Hamza waited to see if there were any further
instructions. When there were not, he moved forward to
collect the coffee tray. He was so absorbed in his
scrutiny of the officer that he became careless in his
movements. He stumbled against the desk and the
crockery on the tray rattled noisily. The officer’s head
spun round, a look of rage in his eyes. ‘Fuck off out of
here,’ he said.
There was a charge in the atmosphere in the mess
that evening, which must have been to do with what
the officer had been reading earlier in the afternoon.
The officer must have received new orders. The talk
between the officers was generally excited but at times
briefly sombre, and altogether far too fluent and
fast-moving for Hamza to follow with assurance. He did
not think they were speaking so fast deliberately to
baffle him and Julius. For a while they seemed unaware
the servants were even there, but at some point they
exchanged glances and must have decided that they did
not want to run the risk of being understood. The
commanding officer nodded at the Feldwebel who
ordered Julius and Hamza to leave the mess. Hamza
heard many words whose meaning he came to
understand more fully later but the one he knew
already was Krieg. Vita. War.
He asked Julius when they were back in their room,
‘Who are we fighting?’
‘Who do you think? Did you not hear them say it was
going to be a big war? I thought you were a miracle
German speaker,’ he said, scowling with disdain. ‘It could
be the Belge or the Portuguese, but the British won’t let
them do that, so it must be all of them. We’ll be
fighting all of them. The Germans wouldn’t say it was
going to be a big war if they were talking about
Wachagga or Wahadimu.’
The following morning, when Hamza brought him his
coffee, the officer said with one of his sardonic smiles,
‘No drill for you today. You missed a class yesterday. I
want you in my office as soon as you have done your
chores. We must not allow communications from the
high command to interfere with your lessons.’
*
In time the routine changed. The officer wanted Hamza
nearby more and more often. The game of teaching his
servant to speak and read German absorbed him and
began to turn serious. He even issued a challenge to
his officers, after several drinks, betting them that he
would have their young schüler reading Schiller before
the monsoons arrived. Which monsoons? The other
officers laughed. Maybe ten years from now.
As before, every morning Hamza filled the officer’s
washbasin with warm fresh water and then went to
fetch his coffee. It had to be made every day from
beans roasted the previous evening and pounded first
thing in the morning. He did not know if the women in
the cooking shed followed these instructions exactly but
the officer did not complain. When he came back with
the coffee the officer was still in bed in the inner room
and took his coffee there when before he would have
been up and dressed in his shirt and trousers. Hamza
waited on the back veranda while the officer washed
and then called him in to help with his boots and
leggings. Once Hamza came back in too soon, when he
judged that the officer was finished washing, and saw
him standing bare-chested in the inner room. His torso
was blotched with burn scars. Hamza retreated hastily
and waited to be called back. He expected a rebuke but
the officer merely talked to him as he usually did at this
hour and made him reply. He called it their first
conversation class of the day. Perhaps he had not seen
Hamza enter. Then Hamza went into the inner room to
make the bed while the officer continued the
conversation as he was shaving. At times the
Oberleutnant fell silent and Hamza knew without looking
that he was staring at him in that strange way of his.
After breakfast he and Julius cleared the mess and
saw to the rooms and their other chores, and then
Hamza reported to the Oberleutnant’s office. He tidied
what needed tidying then waited outside for instructions.
He carried messages to the other officers and
sometimes to the troops outside the boma in the village.
He wandered around there if he was not in a hurry,
and if it was the right time he went to the mosque for
prayers and the company. Every day he collected the
sick report from the medical officer who refused to let
his assistant bring it to the Oberleutnant because he said
he was a medical orderly, not an errand boy. Many of
the officers and the askari suffered from attacks of
malaria from time to time, even though they all took a
dose of quinine every day and slept under mosquito
nets. Some were already infected before they joined up
but there were also times on manoeuvres when they
were unprotected and the mosquitoes could do their
work. There were cases of dysentery and venereal
diseases and jiggers in the toes. There were small
outbreaks of typhoid, which had to be rigorously isolated
and contained in the infirmary. It was from his
surreptitious reading of the sick report that Hamza
learned the well-kept secret of opium addiction among
the Nubi non-commissioned officers.
When he made his daily call at the infirmary, the
medical officer smiled at him in a knowing way Hamza
had come to dislike but had to pretend not to notice.
One morning as he handed over the report, the medical
officer said to his assistant, speaking carefully for
Hamza’s benefit, ‘This young man has become an
obsession of our Oberleutnant’s. He is going to make
him a scholar. He has promised us that this young man
will soon be reading to him at bedtime.’
The two men shared a smile, which the assistant
allowed to slide into a leer. Sometimes when Hamza was
serving in the mess and he was close to the medical
officer’s chair, he felt his thigh being stroked as he
passed. The medical officer did it so that no one else
noticed and then, when he caught Hamza’s eye, gave
him that same smile. Hamza asked Julius if he did that
to him too and he grinned and said no.
‘It’s you he’s after. He likes you. Didn’t you know?
Everyone knows that the medical officer is a basha.
People say that his assistant is his wife. Even in
Germany itself the soldiers are allowed to have sex with
each other. One of the governors of this whole
Deutsch-Ostafrika was a basha. There was a court case
a few years ago when he was accused of keeping a
manservant just for sex.’
‘The governor himself was taken to court? Who can
take the governor to court?’ Hamza asked. ‘Doesn’t the
governor own the court?’
‘This is a Christian government,’ Julius said with a tiny
smug smile. ‘No one owns the court.’
‘But the governor, taken to court because he is a
basha!’ Hamza said, still incredulous.
‘Yes, the governor himself and several of his officers.
Did you not hear about that?’
‘No,’ Hamza said.
Julius looked pityingly at him. He considered Hamza
unfortunate in many ways and told him so, not least
because of his lack of a mission education and his
backward religion. Hamza guessed that Julius thought
himself better suited to serve the commanding officer
instead of having to look after those of lesser rank,
especially the bad-tempered Feldwebel, a disgraceful class
of man in Julius’s often-repeated opinion. He dropped his
voice now as he continued, ‘I have heard even the
Kaiser himself,’ he whispered, nodding his head
meaningfully.
‘No, you’re adding too much salt,’ Hamza said in
exaggerated disbelief. ‘The Kaiser himself.’
‘Not so loud! Yes, only they try to hush all this up
because they are afraid we will laugh at them.’
When Hamza was not running errands or sitting out of
the way on the stool outside the office, and the
commanding officer was not occupied with military duties
in the boma or in the field, he called him in, on a whim
it seemed, and made him sit at the draughtsman’s table
with some writing exercise. It was often copying from
the field manual, which had translations of simple
phrases from German to Kiswahili and a variety of
instructions in German that Hamza had to copy and
translate. When he did not know a word, he spoke it
out loud and the officer told him its meaning. Sometimes
the lesson was reversed and the officer asked for the
Kiswahili word for something. What is the word for
frankincense? Ubani. How do you say numb? Ganzi.
What is the word for foam? Foam? Bubbles. Mapovu.
The officer sometimes interrupted his own work to
have a few minutes’ conversation with Hamza. He gave
him an almost imperceptible nod of approval when he
did well, and smiled with reluctant glee when he
achieved something unexpected. You are doing very well,
he told him, but you’re not yet ready for Schiller.
Lessons sometimes continued in the afternoon as well so
Hamza felt, as he had never done before, like someone
at school. They ended with the muadhin calling people to
the maghrib prayer in the village outside the boma,
which was usually the signal for the officer to pour
himself his first schnapps of the evening.
Hamza was now visibly under the Oberleutnant’s
protection, and while he was not spared the bullying and
abuse that was regular military practice in the boma, he
was at least safe from the floggings and hard labour
which were inescapable for many of the troops. He was
not spared the Feldwebel’s contempt, though. He called
Hamza a toy soldier behind the commanding officer’s
back.
‘Whose toy are you? You are his pretty toy, little
shoga plaything, aren’t you?’ he said, wagging a finger
in disdainful warning and once reaching out and
squeezing Hamza’s nipple. ‘You make me sick.’
A kind of gloom descended on the Oberleutnant at
times and he fell silent for long periods, or else spoke
cryptic words that sounded like self-mockery. When
Hamza looked up enquiringly, he said something cruel or
scornful. Do you want to know exactly what I said, you
slow-witted baboon? Hamza learned not to look up when
he sensed this mood and, if he could, kept his distance.
He had known from the beginning that the officer was
capable of violence. He had seen it in the light in his
eyes which glistened involuntarily, and in the tightening
of the skin at his temple, as if he were suppressing a
burning urge. When he was in deep concentration or
sunk in despondency, he kneaded that fold of skin
abstractedly. Hamza dreaded these dark moments when
he was vulnerable to any humiliation the officer wished
to inflict on him. He had his own ways of doing this,
which involved a scornful stare, and sometimes the
crash of something against the desk followed by a
stream of abuse during which Hamza stood quite still
while the officer raged and then gave an abrupt order
for him to get out. He did his best to keep away when
he suspected the onset of this mood, but this too could
be viewed as a provocation if the officer called for him
and he was not there or took too long in coming.
As Hamza’s understanding of German improved, he
took in more of what the officer was saying, at times
the same thing repeatedly, often when he was writing:
Why did it have to turn out like this? Why did it have
to turn out like this? He would exclaim in rage at the
heat or at a correspondent he was addressing: There is
no point in saying the same thing over and over again
– although that is what I am doing. At other times he
would speak to Hamza directly, as if they were in the
middle of a conversation: The stupidity of explaining
ourselves and what we are doing has no limit because
none of it is in the least convincing. We just say the
same thing over and over again. At such moments
Hamza pretended he was deaf, and perhaps to the
officer he was invisible.
Then one day the Oberleutnant announced a
large-scale manoeuvre in two days’ time, to get all the
troops combat ready. Preparations had been intensifying
and field messages and telegrams had been growing
more frequent. They were all waiting for the order to
move. The officers held long sombre conferences and
took the troops out on regular exercises. War was
coming. In a quiet moment at the end of that day of
frenzy when Hamza was tidying up in the officer’s
apartment, he sensed a sinister silence which was so
thick it terrified him.
‘What are you doing here? What is someone like you
doing in this brutish business?’ the officer asked into the
silence.
‘I am here to serve the schutztruppe and the Kaiser,’
Hamza said, stiffening to attention and looking straight
ahead.
‘Yes, of course you are. What nobler duty can there
be!’ the officer said mockingly, coming around to face
him. ‘I suppose you could ask me the same question.
What is a man from the lovely little town of Marbach
doing here in this shithole? I was born into a military
tradition and this is my duty. That’s why I am here –
to take possession of what rightfully belongs to us
because we are stronger. We are dealing with backward
and savage people and the only way to rule them is to
strike terror into them and their vain Liliputmajestät
sultans, and pummel all of them into obedience. The
schutztruppe is our instrument. You are too. We want
you to be disciplined and obedient and cruel beyond our
imagining. We want you to be thick-skinned heartless
braggarts who will do our bidding without hesitation and
then we will pay you well and give you the respect you
deserve, whether slave, soldier or outcast. Except – you
are not one of them. You tremble and look and listen to
every heartbeat as if all of it torments you. I have
watched you from the beginning when they first brought
you here. You are a dreamer.’
Hamza stood quite still, staring ahead.
‘I pulled you out of that line because I liked the look
of you,’ the officer said, standing two paces in front of
him. ‘Are you frightened of me? I like people to be
frightened of me. It makes me strong.’
The officer stepped forward and slapped Hamza on the
left cheek then slapped him with the back of his hand
on the right cheek. Hamza gasped from the shock and
after a moment felt his flesh tingling with pain. The
officer was now only inches away and Hamza breathed
in again the astringent and medicinal smell he had
caught the first morning the Oberleutnant inspected the
recruits, only now he knew that it was schnapps.
‘Did that hurt you? Your suffering does not concern
me,’ the officer said, standing very close to him. Hamza
avoided eye contact and saw the stretched skin on the
officer’s temple ripple against his cranium. ‘Answer my
question. Are you frightened of me?’
‘Ndio bwana,’ Hamza said loudly.
The officer laughed. ‘I teach you to speak and read
German so you can understand Schiller and you answer
me in that childish language. Now answer me properly.’
‘Jawohl, herr Oberleutnant,’ Hamza said, and then to
himself: Scheißer.
The officer looked grim-faced at Hamza for a moment
and then said ‘You have lost your place in the world. I
don’t know why it concerns me but it does. Well,
perhaps I do know. I don’t suppose you know what I’m
talking about. I don’t suppose you have any idea of the
jeopardy that surrounds you. All right, go and do your
work.’ As he turned away and walked towards the inner
room, he said over his shoulder, ‘Get out, and make
sure all my gear is ready for the manoeuvres.’
*
The war started two days later. The telegram orders
arrived the morning after they returned from
manoeuvres. They were to take the train to Moshi and
then march to positions near the border to reinforce the
defensive line. The orders were carried out with trained
and practised precision. The troops marched from the
boma to the town in close formation, singing their
marching songs, while their officers rode ahead of them
or strode beside them. The carrier corps, the wives and
children and livestock, came behind them, so that by
the time everyone was boarded, the train was so full
that the carriers and the gun boys had to ride on the
roof. After Moshi they marched north towards the
border with British East Africa. That was how that part
of the world was at the time. Every bit of it belonged to
Europeans, at least on a map: British East Africa,
Deutsch-Ostafrika, África Oriental Portuguesa, Congo
Belge.
Their column of one hundred and fifty askari stretched
for a mile or more with the addition of all the followers.
The askari were at the front of the column with their
officers riding ahead and the staff-surgeons and medical
orderlies immediately behind them. That was always the
formation on a march and in battle. Then came the
carriers bringing equipment, ammunition, supplies and the
officers’ personal effects. Behind them came the
camp-followers with a small group of askari under a
German officer as a rearguard, to counter desertion and
pilfering.
The wives and partners were not just camp-followers.
When the schutztruppe marched, the whole boma
settlement marched with them. For one thing, the askari
would not go to war without their partners. For another,
the schutztruppe lived off the land when they could and
it was the women who foraged for food and information,
who cooked for the troops, traded where there was
trade, and kept their husbands content. It was a
concession Wissman had to make when he set up the
schutztruppe and it was not possible to unmake it
without risking widespread mutiny and desertion.
Many of the askari in Hamza’s troop were seasoned
campaigners and some of them knew this area. When
they were camped in askari lines in the evenings they
told stories of their earlier exploits in these parts: how
they subdued the disobedient Wachagga chiefs Rindi and
his son Meli, and hanged thirteen of their other chiefs,
how they razed villages for hiding food or for sabotage,
and how they dealt with the rebellious people of Meru
and Arusha who had killed German missionaries. They
were all washenzi to the askari. They had to be
subdued and flogged and disciplined and terrified. The
more they rebelled, the worse their punishment. That
was the way the schutztruppe worked. At the slightest
sign of resistance, the schwein were crushed and their
livestock slaughtered and villages burned. These were
their orders and they carried them out with an
enthusiastic efficiency that terrified their enemies and
brought them respect in the eyes of fellow askari and
the community. They were ferocious and merciless,
wallahi.
As they told their swaggering stories and marched
across the rain-shadow plains of the great mountain,
they did not know that they were to spend years
fighting across swamps and mountains and forests and
grasslands, in heavy rain and drought, slaughtering and
being slaughtered by armies of people they knew
nothing about: Punjabis and Sikhs, Fantis and Akans
and Hausas and Yorubas, Kongo and Luba, all
mercenaries who fought the Europeans’ wars for them,
the Germans with their schutztruppe, the British with
their King’s African Rifles and the Royal West African
Frontier Force and their Indian troops, the Belgians with
their Force Publique. In addition, there were South
Africans, Belgians and a crowd of other European
volunteers who thought killing was an adventure and
were happy to be at the service of the great machinery
of conquest and empire. It was astonishing to the askari
to see the great variety of people whose existence they
had not even known about. The magnitude of what was
to come was not clear this early in the war as they
marched to the border, their German officers riding
ahead of them on their mules, their wives and children
straggling cheerfully behind, and somehow or other they
were all able to find ways to sing and laugh and join in
convivial displays.
Hostilities on the border began with the German
commander attempting to take Mombasa a few hundred
miles away. The target turned out to be too far for
their supply lines and the schutztruppe was forced to
retreat. For months to come, the war for Hamza and
his troop was repeated patrols and raids to cut the
railway in British East Africa. On the coast, the British
made a landing in Tanga. In November 1914 the Royal
Navy and accompanying troop ships arrived at the port
and demanded its surrender. The small schutztruppe
force prepared to resist, withdrawing from the town from
fear of bombardment by the Royal Navy ships. The rest
of the inhabitants of the town, who had nothing at stake
in the war, recoiled and cowered in terror or fled to the
country if they could. The point of trying to take this
town was that it was the terminus of the railway, which
ran to Moshi in the north.
The British landing ended in disaster. Several battalions,
mostly Indian troops, were disembarked some little
distance up the coast from the port. Their commanders
were not sure what opposition to expect so made this
cautious approach. The disembarkation was made in
darkness, wading hip-deep in the sea. In the morning
the troops found themselves in thick scrub and high
grass without any certainty of the direction of the town.
As they made their way towards what they took to be
the town, they were harassed and picked off by the
schutztruppe, who were reinforced by troops rushed
down from Moshi on the train. The schutztruppe were
expert at this hit-and-run style of war and their tactics
created a panic in the troops and the carriers who took
fright and ran. As casualties mounted, more soldiers ran
and then after repeated panics everybody ran, and
those who were still being landed ran straight back into
the sea.
In the meantime the Royal Navy was firing its guns
into the town, destroying buildings and killing an
unknown number of its inhabitants. No one bothered to
count afterwards. One of the targets the Royal Navy hit
was the hospital where the wounded were being treated
by the Germans, but that was the random ill luck of
war. By the time it was all over and the British asked
for a truce, leaving most of their equipment behind,
several hundred of their troops were dead on the road
and in the streets of the town. An unknown number of
carriers were also killed or drowned. No one bothered to
count the dead carriers either, not then nor throughout
the whole war. As soon as this encounter was settled,
Hamza’s troop was railed up the line to Moshi and back
to their old position. It was going to be that kind of war
for the schutztruppe, a frenzy of rapid advances and
retreats.
Despite the failure of the landing, the British Imperial
machinery ground into gear, and troops began to arrive
from various parts of the globe. It was certain to be
just a matter of months before the conflict was over,
they believed, but the German commander had other
ideas. Every time the British Imperial forces thought they
had the schutztruppe trapped they slipped away, leaving
their sick and badly wounded for the British to look
after. The schutztruppe were often exhausted and many
of them fell ill, but there was also exhilaration in the
swift raids and retreats that outwitted their enemies.
They fed themselves on whatever they found in the
villages and farms, plundering and confiscating wherever
they could.
Pressed on all sides, the schutztruppe retreated in two
columns, one along the lakes to the west and the other
due south from Moshi. Hamza was in the column that
headed due south. They dragged their big guns and
equipment, their wives and servants and baggage, on
the retreat across the Uluguru mountain ranges. It was
in the retreat from Morogoro across the Uluguru that
Komba, their platoon leader, was killed. A large piece of
metal from a shell smashed into his chest and tore him
to pieces. Several others in the platoon were also killed
in the same action or did not come back. For the next
several months Hamza’s troop retreated slowly south
towards the Rufiji river, constantly fighting, some of them
fierce battles as in Kibati where thousands were killed.
The Rufiji was in heavy flood that year and the
mosquitoes were rampant. More askari died from
blackwater fever than from any other cause. Carriers
were seized by crocodiles as they crossed the swamps.
Hyenas dug up the dead. It was a nightmare. They
finally crossed the Rufiji and afterwards fought the Battle
of Mahiwa, which was the worst battle of all for Hamza’s
troop and for the schutztruppe. It was a costly victory
for them but still they retreated, to the southern
highlands and then to the Ruvuma river and the border
with Portuguese East Africa. On the way they shed
equipment and wives and children, leaving them behind
to be interned by the British. They did not always know
where they were, even with their maps, and they were
forced to capture and question local people. There was
always someone among the askari who could
understand enough of the language to put the question,
and somehow or other the infliction of sufficient pain
elicited the required answer. No one needed to order
the askari to do violence and brutality on the people.
They knew what was needed and required no
instruction. At this stage of the war, most of the soldiers
engaged in combat were Africans and Indians: troops
from Nyasaland and Uganda, from Nigeria and the Gold
Coast, from the Congo and from India, and on the
other side the African schutztruppe.
Even as the schutztruppe lost soldiers and carriers
through battle, disease and desertion, their officers kept
fighting on with manic obstinacy and persistence. The
askari left the land devastated, its people starving and
dying in the hundreds of thousands, while they struggled
on in their blind and murderous embrace of a cause
whose origins they did not know and whose ambitions
were vain and ultimately intended for their domination.
The carriers died in huge numbers from malaria and
dysentery and exhaustion, and no one bothered to
count them. They deserted in sheer terror, to perish in
the ravaged countryside. Later these events would be
turned into stories of absurd and nonchalant heroics, a
sideshow to the great tragedies in Europe, but for those
who lived through it, this was a time when their land
was soaked in blood and littered with corpses.
In the meantime, the officers made sure to maintain
European prestige. When they made camp the Germans
were in separate lines from the askari, sleeping in their
camp beds under mosquito nets. When they stopped by
a stream, they were always upstream with the askari
downstream and the carriers and animals yet further
down. The officers made every effort to meet for a
mess dinner every evening, where etiquette was
observed as far as possible. They did not do any of the
physical work associated with the askari or carriers:
transporting equipment, foraging, making camp, cooking,
cleaning dishes. They kept their distance, eating
separately, demanding deference wherever they could.
The whole schutztruppe army now, officers and men,
were dressed in whatever bits of clothing they could
salvage from fallen comrades and enemies, which some
of the askari took as licence to adopt extravagant
displays of feathers and badges, though their officers still
strutted about as if they were dressed in silver buckles
and gold epaulettes. The askari too had their own
honour to maintain. They insisted on their difference
from the carriers and considered it below their soldierly
prestige to carry loads.
Of the other officers from the boma, the medical officer
and Feldwebel Walther the Jogoo were still with the
company. Two officers were killed on the retreat from
the Rufiji and were replaced by an officer from the
musikappel and a settler volunteer. Three were
transferred to other companies. All of the askari who
had joined up at the same time as Hamza were dead
or missing or captured. After months and years of
harried manoeuvres and disastrous engagements the
remaining men were ragged and worn out. The medical
officer had lost weight and grown a thick brassy beard.
He was kept constantly busy tending to injuries and
illnesses, issuing daily doses of quinine to the troops
while his supplies lasted. He had to conserve supplies as
best he could, so the carriers did not receive quinine
any more. His orderly was still with him, lanky and
phlegmatic as ever. The medical officer was even more
cheerful than he had been in camp, chuckling and
laughing as he saw to his grisly tasks, but it was a
cheerfulness he kept going with his carefully guarded
supply of brandy and other substances from his
medicine chest. He had malarial fever punctually every
two days which laid him out for several hours. These
bouts took their toll, and each time he rose he seemed
to have lost more weight and his smiles seemed to
have grown weaker.
The Feldwebel was now out of his mind with rage at
every irritation they encountered, his frenzy fed by bangi
and the sorghum beer they confiscated from villagers.
He never seemed to fall ill as all the other officers did
at one time or another. His temper was so out of
control that he frequently hit askari and porters with
whatever was at hand: a cane, a whip or a piece of
firewood. He was even more vicious than he used to be
in his hatred and contempt for the local people whose
land they plundered. To him they were savages and he
spoke about them with greater ferocity than he showed
towards the British enemy. He had a deep loathing of
Hamza and abused him whenever he caught him out in
any trivial, or sometimes imaginary, wrongdoing. Hamza
kept out of his way whenever he could but it seemed
at times as if the Feldwebel was looking for him.
Hamza was inseparable from the Oberleutnant, at his
commander’s insistence, which aroused some of the
other officers to glowering indignation, others to mockery
and the Feldwebel to more hatred. The askari assailed
Hamza with their grumbles and told him to pass them
on to his officer. Hamza nodded and said nothing. He
was required to roll out his sleeping mat beside the
officer’s cot at dusk for an hour or two while he
continued with what he called their conversation classes.
After that Hamza was to pick up his mat and go back
to the askari lines. Some nights the officer reached out
to touch him in the dark. You are still there. You are so
quiet, he said. Hamza did not know what he wanted of
him. He felt trapped in the officer’s embrace and was
made queasy by the enforced intimacy although it was
easier to evade it in war than it had been in the boma.
In the field there was a great deal more to occupy the
commanding officer as they raided and hid and searched
for food and the conversation classes sometimes seemed
perfunctory.
The officer lost much of his scornful and satirical aura
as their difficulties increased and now he was often cold
and withdrawn, sometimes silent for long periods in the
grip of his dark moods. The other German officers kept
up a grim camaraderie, which made the Oberleutnant’s
withdrawal more apparent. Their privations and way of
war had weakened many of them but it had turned the
officer inwards and made him hesitant where he had
been so commanding before. He was more irritable with
his officers and askari, and he was impatient with the
villagers they plundered, sometimes issuing harsh orders
to punish what he called acts of sabotage, burning their
huts after confiscating all their supplies. At one village
the other officers suggested the execution of an elder
because he had refused to disclose an underground
cache of yams, which they were only able to discover
by beating a young boy and forcing him to tell them.
The officer dropped his eyes before his officers’ request
and then nodded and walked away. The Feldwebel shot
the old man in the head.
Throughout the hundreds of nightmare miles they
struggled through, Hamza carried out whatever orders
his officer found it possible to give under their very
reduced circumstances, and as far as possible tried to
provide for him. He did his best not to draw attention to
himself. He marched with the troop and ran on the
crouch as he was trained to do and fired his gun when
he needed to but he was not sure if he ever hit
anyone. He ducked and weaved and yelled like the
other askari but he shot at shadows, avoiding targets.
By miraculous luck he did not have to engage in close
combat, and he managed to avoid shooting any of the
villagers they were at times required to take reprisals on
because of their treachery or deceit. He ate the stolen
food like everyone else and saw the ruination of the
land and hurried away as they all did. He was in a
state of terror from the moment he opened his eyes at
first light, but in his exhaustion he sometimes reached a
stage when he was unafraid, without bravado, without
posturing, detached from the moment and open to
whatever might happen to him. Sometimes he lapsed
into despair.
6
They talked about the war in Tanga for many weeks up
and down the coast, but for most of them it was quiet
after the disastrous attack. It was as everyone had
anticipated: the British were no match for the
schutztruppe. As word travelled down the coast from
Tanga, rumour expanded and embellished the ferocity
and discipline of the askari and the shambolic panic of
the Indian troops, who it was assumed must have led
the panic. Khalifa said they were bound to hear from
Ilyas about this German victory – he would not be able
to resist singing the praise of the schutztruppe – but
they heard nothing from him.
The British reply to their defeat was a Royal Navy
blockade of the coast. No trade was possible with
Zanzibar or Mombasa or Pemba across the way, let
alone the long-distance trade across the ocean.
Overnight, shortages appeared as merchants hurried to
hoard their merchandise, both to conserve supplies and
to wait for prices to rise while keeping their goods out
of the hands of the German authorities, who were sure
to want to confiscate everything for themselves and their
troops. Nassor Biashara, whose business had been
slowly recovering from the collapse and near ruin of
paying off the creditors after his father’s death, now
found himself in even more dire straits. He had
committed himself to buying several items for wholesale
distribution among customers in the interior: Indian
sugar, wheat for flour-milling, sorghum and rice, all paid
for and awaiting delivery. He thought he could make
good his losses to the creditors with one ambitious
enterprise, but the blockade caught him out.
It was not only business people like Nassor Biashara
who felt the consequences of the blockade. Many things
became scarcer than before: rice, coffee and tea –
even though all these were grown in the country –
sugar, salt-fish, flour. The schutztruppe fed themselves
off the land whenever they could, and now they were
at war all provisions were at their disposal. Fish was still
plentiful and coconuts and bananas and cassava still
grew despite the Royal Navy and the schutztruppe. For
a while people bought by offering something else: a shirt
for a basket of mangoes, a roll of cotton material for a
ram. No one bothered much about money, just for a
while. Where appropriate items of exchange were not to
be had, there was always jewellery. Most families
possessed some little bit of jewellery which came as
dowry and was passed down the generations. Merchants
and traders knew the durable value of gold and gems
and could not resist them when they came on offer. For
a while the panic of scarcity took over.
They had very little news of the war in the interior
and what they had came through the German
administration. It seemed that the experience of Tanga
was enough to deter the British from making another
landing anywhere on the coast, and as the period of
quiet extended even though they were under blockade,
so people adapted and coped, and in the greater chaos
they were able to avoid paying the German authorities
the taxes they normally imposed on them. Business and
trade began to pick up, although Nassor Biashara’s
affairs were still in trouble.
‘Nothing came out of your cleverness but ruin,’ Khalifa
said to him.
The merchant disliked the tone that Khalifa sometimes
used with him, as if he were still a novice at his work.
It was evident that he attempted to control his anger
when Khalifa said this. He glared back with lips pressed
tightly together, then looked away for a moment before
he began speaking slowly. He was not yet ready for a
confrontation. ‘There was no cleverness in it. I just
thought that we needed to do something to repair the
business. How was I to know about the war and the
blockade?’
‘To put everything in one venture like that,’ Khalifa
said, ‘did not show good business sense.’
‘What did you expect me to do, just wait until I was
impoverished? I did not put everything into that venture.
We still have the timber business,’ Nassor Biashara said
angrily. Then he took a deep breath and after a
moment continued in a more measured tone. ‘And
anyway, if you know so much about business, where
were you when all the debts were piling up in my
father’s time? Why did you not say something like that
to him instead of grumbling at me now?’
‘I did not know all his business dealings. I told you
that,’ Khalifa said.
‘You were his clerk. You should’ve known,’ Nassor
Biashara said. ‘You should have been keeping records.’
‘Are you blaming me for your father’s secrecy?’ Khalifa
asked mildly, smiling his disdain.
Nassor Biashara lowered his glasses, which were
perched on his forehead during this exchange, and
returned to the ledger he was once again checking
through for evidence of his father’s transactions, just in
case he had missed something in his earlier perusals. He
did not speak to Khalifa for the rest of the day and
avoided eye contact. He continued in this taciturn way
for a few days, speaking politely but only when it was
necessary. There was not much business to do. Nassor
Biashara spent more and more of his day in the tiny
office he had in the timber yard. Most of the time they
sat in the office and talked with whoever dropped by.
They did not have another conversation like that but
one day Nassor Biashara announced that he had found
a tenant for the office downstairs who was going to turn
it into a provisions shop, a duka. ‘I am moving the
paperwork to the timber yard and selling all the
furniture. From now on, you will look after the
warehouse as there are no books for you to keep, and
what paperwork there is I will do myself. You’ll also
have to take a cut in pay. We all will while things are
as they are.’
He delivered this announcement with some asperity,
discouraging conversation. As soon as he was done with
saying what he had to say, he put on his cap and
went upstairs.
‘He’s trying to get rid of you,’ Bi Asha said. ‘That
miserable ungrateful wretch, that small-boned thieving
hypocrite, after all you’ve done for him and his father.’
She went on in that vein for a long time while Khalifa
listened gratefully to her outrage. He knew that Nassor
Biashara had no choice but to cut back but he still
enjoyed hearing the little tajiri being torn to pieces. It
surprised him that the young man he had always
known as a shy or even timorous boy was able to act
so decisively. He even smiled secretly at the thought.
Renting out the office was a bit of a panic measure but
not very important in the end as it could always be
reversed. What was there for him to do in a warehouse
that was almost empty? He was afraid that Bi Asha was
right, that the merchant was easing him out and soon
there would be no salary. Perhaps soon there would be
no merchant. Who needed a clerk in these straitened
times?
But the merchant did not get rid of Khalifa. As the war
receded into rumours of fierce fighting in the interior,
Nassor Biashara invested in timber for the repair and
reconstruction that was bound to be necessary once the
conflict was over. Surely it could not continue for much
longer now. He made the decision without consulting or
asking for advice from Khalifa, and he kept his own
records and did not wait for an incompetent clerk to do
so. Khalifa, in the meantime, cleaned out and organised
the warehouse to receive the timber that the merchant
purchased. He too kept his own records just in case
the future brought accusations of incompetence or
worse.
One of Amur Biashara’s old business contacts, Rashid
Maulidi, who was the nahodha of a boat lying idle at the
wharf, had a word with Nassor Biashara about a
venture he had in mind to bring in rice and sugar from
Pemba. The merchant knew without knowing the precise
details that Rashid Maulidi was part of the dubious
network of traders his father had patronised. He said
no, it was too dangerous. If the British caught him, they
would sink his boat and perhaps lock him up for years.
If the Germans knew he had smuggled in supplies of
rice and sugar, they would take it away for themselves
and whip him with a kiboko for hoarding. Rashid Maulidi
went to Khalifa who was more familiar with the kind of
dealings he had in mind and explained his plan, and
Khalifa listened carefully and asked Rashid Maulidi if he
could bring in a consignment on credit. Was that
possible? He said that his credit was good in Pemba,
which was his homeland, but he was not sure if he
wanted to take the entire risk himself. If something went
wrong, he did not have the means to put it right and
would lose his boat. Khalifa said that the merchant was
a nervy young man who needed persuading. He
suggested that Rashid Maulidi should get a small
consignment on credit, just to demonstrate that the
scheme was viable, and then they would speak to the
merchant again. Rashid Maulidi brought in a modest
consignment of rice and sugar as agreed, and when it
was safely stored away in the warehouse, they brought
Nassor Biashara to see it.
‘You don’t know this is here,’ Khalifa said. ‘You give
me the money to pay for this in my name and then I
sell it. After that the business pays for itself. We use the
proceeds to buy more supplies. There is no need for
you to be involved. Whatever profit we make, we divide
four parts to you, four parts to Rashid Maulidi, two parts
to me. You don’t need to know anything further about
it.’
There was still some haggling to do, but despite
arguments back and forth that was how it ended up.
Throughout the remaining years of the blockade, Rashid
Maulidi brought in small supplies of whatever he could
purchase in Pemba and Khalifa hid them away in the
warehouse where trusted traders came to do business.
It was not riches but it kept the business going and
allowed Khalifa to find a new role for himself as a trader
in contraband as well as a warehouse keeper. He dealt
with Nassor Biashara politely, if at times irritably, and
they largely left each other alone.
*
The British forces entered Tanga on 3 July 1916, nearly
two years after the disastrous attempt in 1914. A small
force of a few hundred Indian troops took the port
without firing a shot. They found a town still bearing the
scars of the Royal Navy bombardment, and the port
and the Customs House buildings and jetty were in
ruins, blown up by the Germans before they left.
German forces in the area went to join their
commander in the interior who was regrouping his
forces before retreating further south. It was the end of
the war for that part of the coast, though there was
still the struggle for Bagamoyo and Dar es Salam to
come in August. It was also the end of the blockade
and a slow return to commerce with Mombasa and
Pemba and Zanzibar. They now began to have more
detailed news of the war in the interior. Everyone was
sure the war was going to be over very soon. It will
not last beyond the monsoons, they said.
Afiya was thirteen years old when the British took
control of the coast. It was now more than two years
since Ilyas left for Dar es Salaam and in all that time
they had heard nothing from him. Baba Khalifa told her
that the news from the interior was there was fighting
everywhere with many casualties, German, British, South
African, Indian, but most of them African. Schutztruppe
askari, KAR, West African armies, many Africans are
being killed to settle this European quarrel, he said.
Maalim Abdalla persuaded Habib, Ilyas’s fellow clerk on
the sisal estate, to make some enquiries. He learned
what they already knew: that Ilyas was sent to Dar es
Salaam for training, but they also found out that he was
trained as a signalman and posted to the Lindi District in
the south. Habib could not find out any more and there
was no one left to ask because the German manager
was now interned by the British.
Khalifa had heard that Tabora was taken by the
Belgian Force Publique and that it had been a terrible
battle. The worst of the fighting had then moved south
and was now in the Lindi region, exactly where Ilyas
was supposed to have been posted as a signalman. He
did not say so to Afiya, but he was beginning to think
there was something ominous about her brother’s long
silence. Instead he tried to understate his concern when
he spoke to her. ‘A signalman is a peaceful kind of
duty,’ he said to her. ‘He will be fine. His work will be
to stand on a hill a long way from trouble and send
messages on his mirrors. Don’t worry, we’ll hear from
him soon.’
*
Afiya was now no longer a girl but a kijana, a maiden,
and beginning to understand the endless resentments
that were part of the sequestered lives of women. She
did not call on Khalida as often as she used to, because
Bi Asha said she was not to. They were scoundrels in
that family, she said, and the empty-headed women
friends Khalida associated with liked nothing so much as
to gossip and to tear people to shreds, shame on them.
Afiya knew that Bi Asha’s prevailing topic of conversation
was her neighbours, whose shortcomings she relished
and repeatedly described. She did not make any protest
at this new prohibition but when she visited her friend
she did not tell Bi Asha about it, nor did she tell Khalida
what was said about her and her husband or about the
slander of her women friends. Apart from her visits to
Khalida and to Jamila, Afiya was shut up at home day
and night, or shrouded in a buibui when she went out.
She could feel something in her shrinking and turning
edgy as if constantly expecting a scolding. There was so
much that she was now not allowed to do because it
was improper. She was not to touch a boy’s or a
man’s hand even in greeting. She was not to speak to
a boy or a man in the street unless he spoke to her
and was someone she knew. She was not to smile at a
stranger, and always to walk with her eyes cast slightly
downwards to avoid accidental eye contact. Bi Asha
policed her movements, or tried to, advising her firmly
on her behaviour and who she was not to see and
what she was not to do.
Her friend Jamila was still unmarried and Bi Asha
pronounced that the match was likely to be called off.
That was what usually happened when a betrothal went
on for this long. It meant someone was having second
thoughts. Jamila’s fiancé lived in Zanzibar and planned to
move to join her after the wedding, which did not
surprise Bi Asha. Who would not want to leave
Zanzibar? Every disease you could name was to be
found in Zanzibar, including sin and disappointment. Afiya
shrugged and let the bitterness wash over her. Jamila’s
family did not seem to be troubled by the delay and
even talked about it openly and carried on in their
easy-going ways, welcoming Afiya whenever she called
on them and telling her about their plans. The room
downstairs that Ilyas had rented was to be Jamila’s new
home after the wedding and she was having it
decorated in preparation.
Visiting her was not yet prohibited but Afiya sensed Bi
Asha’s mounting disapproval of her old friend. ‘How old
is Jamila now? She must be nearly nineteen. They had
better get her married before she gets up to mischief.
You don’t know how tricky men can be and how foolish
young women are. You mark my words, little girl, they
are making trouble for themselves.’
I am not a little girl, Afiya said to herself and tried not
to mind. In all her time with Bi Asha she had not been
defiant of her wishes and the small wiles she practised
for getting her own way only concerned matters of little
importance. Keeping silent about her visits to Khalida
was her greatest act of defiance, otherwise it was things
like hiding a banana from her market shopping so she
could eat it in the evening when she was sometimes
hungry, or concealing a cowrie necklace that Jamila and
Saada found in their mother’s jewellery box and gave to
her as a gift. Bimkubwa did not approve of adornments.
When Bi Asha caught her out in these instances she
smiled, not minding such small deceptions. Unakuwa
mjanja we, she told the girl. You are becoming cunning.
Baba came to her assistance at times but Bi Asha kept
her sternest instructions for when she and Afiya were
on their own.
When the merchant closed the office and moved to
the timber yard, Baba managed to save an almost clean
ledger, which he brought home for her. The pages were
thick and shiny, and the cover was marbled in grey and
pink. It seemed a pity to write her clumsy scribble in
the beautiful pages. He also brought home past copies
of Kiongozi wherever he found them. There were no
more issues after the arrival of the British but there
were still old copies circulating. Khalifa also found some
copies of Rafiki Yangu through Maalim Abdalla. Those
newspapers were her reading matter and afterwards she
copied whole paragraphs for writing practice. Bi Asha
was suspicious of these publications because she said
they were the words of unbelievers, intended to convert
people with their lies. Their desire to do evil was
relentless. Sometimes Bi Asha recited a qasida while she
worked, and when she was in the mood she dictated a
verse and watched indulgently as Afiya wrote out the
lines. Later she read the verses back to her and Bi
Asha said, let me see and smiled at her cleverness.
Afiya was pleased too but it was not really cleverness
because she could only read slowly and her writing was
laborious and clumsy when Baba’s was so graceful.
‘You just need to practise,’ he said. ‘Make a real
effort.’
‘You don’t need to write like him,’ Bi Asha said. ‘He is
a clerk. You are not going to become a clerk, little girl.’
I’m not a little girl.
*
In her fifteenth year, on the first day of Idd that year,
Afiya wore a dress that her friends Jamila and Saada
made for her as a present. The bodice was made of
blue satin and fitted snugly. The neckline was round and
fringed with white lace. The skirt was full and pleated,
and made from a light blue poplin material with a design
of tiny green blossoms. The material came from their
mother who had saved it from other dresses they had
made in the past. Jamila had a gift for designing
dresses from odd materials and it was she who came
up with the design. When Afiya tried it on at their
house, the sisters smiled at each other in
self-congratulation and told her it fitted very nicely. It
was the most beautiful dress she had ever had. When
she took it home, she hid it under her buibui and put it
away in a cupboard in her room. Some instinct warned
her to do so because she expected disapproval.
Most people had new clothes made for Idd: a new
dress or a kanga for the women, a new kanzu and
kofia or even a jacket for the men. Times were still
hard though the blockade was over and she knew she
was to have a dress from Bimkubwa. It was not new
but one Bimkubwa had made for herself some years
before and now altered so it fitted Afiya in some
fashion. Afiya was slim and still growing, and the dress
hung loose and baggy on her, which Bi Asha said was
not a problem. You’ll grow into it. When she tried it on
on the eve of Idd and paraded round the house in it,
Baba made a face behind Bi Asha’s back, a small
grimace and then a smile of sympathy.
On the first morning of Idd, Afiya did her chores and
helped prepare the festival breakfast in her work clothes.
At mid-morning, when they were done and just before
they were ready to sit down to breakfast, she went to
her room to change. She knew it was expected she
would come out in the dress Bi Asha altered for her.
Instead she changed into the one her friends made for
her, about which she had told neither Bi Asha nor Baba.
When she came out a few minutes later, Baba nodded
and smiled and then silently applauded.
‘That is lovely,’ he said. ‘Now you look like a princess
instead of an orphan. Where did you get that from?’
‘Jamila and Saada made it for me,’ Afiya said.
Bi Asha looked on without a word for a moment, and
just when Afiya thought she was going to be instructed
to go back to her room and change, she too managed
a smile. ‘She is a young woman now,’ she said.
The full weight of Bi Asha’s words became slowly
evident in the months that followed. Whenever Afiya
made ready to go out, Bi Asha asked her to say where
she was going and what she was going there for. When
she returned, Bi Asha asked for an account of who she
had seen and what was said. By degrees, without even
realising what she was doing at first, Afiya found herself
asking Bi Asha’s permission before she went out. Bi
Asha commented on what she wore, commending or
reproving as seemed appropriate to her. The Idd dress
was long-since condemned because it was too small for
her, Bi Asha said. Too tight in the chest, too brazen.
Afiya was even required to cover herself with a kanga
when Baba was around, leaving only her face
uncovered. Bi Asha seemed to know when Afiya’s
periods were due and always asked about them. Afiya
had not yet quite got over the distaste for what
happened to her during her period and she found it
humiliating to be forced to describe the colour and
volume of the mess.
Bi Asha’s tone with her was often grating, as if a low
mutter ran underneath her words. She only seemed
satisfied with Afiya when she joined her in prayers or
when she sat to read the Koran with her in the
afternoon. To prepare for a visit to her friends, Afiya put
in a lengthy spell of piety beforehand, and sometimes
did so just to win some respite. She felt hemmed in
and under scrutiny all the time, as if she were secretly
contemplating sins. Afiya was sure that Bi Asha searched
her room when she was out. She was by now resentful
and guilty at the same time because she reminded
herself of the kindness Bi Asha had showed her when
she was a wounded and frightened child. She wanted to
say to Bimkubwa that she was not a child any more
but she did not dare. She did not even know how old
she really was because no one had bothered to record
her birth.
When she said this to Baba, he said, ‘Let’s work it
out. You know what year you were born because that
was the year Ilyas ran away. So now select the date of
your birth. Not everyone has this privilege. Mine was
written down by my father. Bi Asha’s was recorded in
an accounts ledger belonging to Bwana Amur Biashara.
You can choose your own date of birth. Please yourself.’
Afiya selected the sixth day of the sixth month –
mwezi sita wa mfungo sita – because she liked the
cadence. So from now on you’ll know exactly how old
you are, Baba said. Some months into her sixteenth
year, the full weight of the words Bi Asha had spoken
on that first day of Idd when Afiya wore the dress her
friends made for her, descended on her.
‘You’re a young woman now,’ Bi Asha said as they sat
together after breakfast on another Idd day a year
later. ‘It’s time to find you a husband.’
Baba chuckled, assuming that Bi Asha was teasing
Afiya about being grown up. Afiya smiled too, thinking
the same.
‘I am not making a joke,’ Bi Asha said dryly, and
Afiya instantly realised what she should have realised in
the first place. No, she wasn’t. ‘We can’t have a grown
woman sitting around the house with nothing to do. She
will only get up to mischief. She needs to have a
husband.’
‘A grown woman! She is only a girl,’ Baba said
incredulously, and with such feeling that Bi Asha
breathed in sharply in surprise. ‘You’re always calling her
little girl and now she is suddenly a woman.’
‘Not suddenly,’ Bi Asha said. ‘Don’t pretend that you
haven’t noticed.’
‘Let her have her youth before burdening her with
children. What’s the hurry? Has someone asked for
her?’
‘No, not yet, but someone will very soon, I expect.
You have worked it out for yourself. She is sixteen,’ Bi
Asha said stubbornly. ‘It’s a perfectly normal age for a
girl to be married.’
‘It’s ignorance and narrow-mindedness,’ Baba said
vehemently, and Bi Asha puckered her mouth in
temporary retreat.
7
One night a detachment of five led by the officer and
including Hamza headed for a German mission called
Kilemba, which they hoped the British command had not
yet reached. The British practice was to close all
German outposts, farms or missions, to prevent the
schutztruppe from receiving supplies there. The German
civilians were treated with the courtesies befitting citizens
of an enlightened combatant nation and were taken
away to Rhodesia or British East Africa or Blantyre in
Nyasaland where they could be interned by other
Europeans until the end of hostilities. It would not do to
have Europeans watched over and restrained by
unsupervised Africans. The local Africans, who were
neither citizens nor members of a nation nor
enlightened, and who were in the path of the
belligerents, were ignored or robbed and, when necessity
required, forcibly recruited into the carrier corps.
The officer knew from his map that the mission used
to be near here before the war, but he was not sure if
it was still open or if the British had got to it already.
Normally finding it would have been left to the askari
troops who were expert at reconnaissance and tracking,
but their commanding officer was curious about the
mission station, which he had heard about from a fellow
officer who had spent some weeks there recuperating
during the Maji Maji war. There was also the lure of
finding a German meal and some good schnapps,
Hamza suspected.
They found the mission without any difficulty and
arrived there in late afternoon. They had crossed from a
wooded area, which rose into a stony escarpment and
then descended into a grassy plain surrounded by
mountains in the distance. The mission was at the top
of a rise in the middle of the plain. It had a walled
compound, with whitewashed buildings and a spreading
fig tree. It looked serene and peaceful on the hill. The
pastor was still there with his wife and two blonde-haired
little girls, and stood waiting to greet them at the inner
gate when they arrived. It was obvious that they were
delighted to see the German troops, adult faces smiling
while the children waved.
There were two small, fenced-in cultivated terraces just
inside the outer gate, with pumpkins and cabbages and
another crop Hamza did not recognise. The detachment
waited there while the officer went forward to greet the
missionary and his family and then follow them inside. A
few moments later an African man came out and invited
them into the compound. His brow and face were
heavily lined, and there was a jagged scar on the right
side of his neck. He spoke Kiswahili fluently. He told
them his name was Pascal and he worked in the
mission. The mission was large and had several
buildings, a school, an infirmary, a chicken run and a
fruit and vegetable garden. There had been fighting
nearby and the people from neighbouring villages had all
run away. That was why it looked so empty. Normally
there were children in the school and the infirmary was
always busy, treating the multitude of diseases that
afflicted people in these parts: worms, sleeping sickness,
malaria. The mission was allowed to stay open by the
British because the pastor and his family had looked
after a wounded Rhodesian officer who befriended them
and pleaded for them to be left to stay and look after
the local people rather than be sent to Blantyre for
internment.
‘Why did the people not come into the mission for
safety?’ an askari called Frantz asked.
‘Because the pastor said not to,’ Pascal said. ‘He did
not want the British to come back and say he was
keeping ruga ruga here.’
‘Do you have ruga ruga?’ Frantz asked, taking on the
role of spokesman.
‘I don’t know,’ Pascal said. ‘I haven’t seen any. That is
who we are really frightened of, not the British and the
Rhodesians but the ruga ruga. Some people say they
are cannibals.’
Some of the askari laughed at this. ‘Who told you
that?’ a soldier called Albert asked. It had become the
fashion among some of the askari to take German
names.
‘People say it,’ said Pascal calmly. ‘The Rhodesian
officer who was here told the pastor that the ruga ruga
don’t take prisoners and they eat human flesh. I don’t
know if it’s true.’
‘They are just rabble-rout riff-raff, not cannibals. They
are savages in their goatskins and feathers, playing at
being fierce,’ Frantz said after another bout of laughter.
‘We use them because they have a terrible reputation
and create havoc and frighten people. Do you know
why they are called ruga ruga? Because they are full of
bangi and are always jumping about. Ruga ruga, do
you see? We are the people you should really be afraid
of, the schutztruppe. We are merciless angry bastards
who like to have our own way and to bully and mutilate
washenzi civilians. Our officers are high-handed experts
in terror. Without us there is no Deutsch-Ostafrika. Fear
us.’
‘Ndio mambo yalivyo,’ the mission man said quietly.
That’s how things are. His polite indifference made it
seem as if he did not really believe Frantz or else was
not as awe-struck as the askari might have liked.
Later Pascal brought them food – mealie and salt-fish
stew – and some plums and figs, which they ate in the
lean-to where they spread their gear and mats. He sat
with them while they ate with great relish. This is a
feast, they said. You don’t know what we’ve been
eating out there. Afterwards Pascal fetched two other
men who also worked on the mission, Witness and
Jeremiah who preferred to be called Juma. They were
fellow Christian members of the mission community. They
looked after the animals and the gardens, and Witness’s
wife looked after the house. She was inside serving the
family and the officer their lovely German dinner at that
very moment, Pascal told them. Frantz began talking
about battles and the vicious events they had
participated in and the other askari joined in with their
own gruesome contributions. It was to frighten the
mission men but they sat there and took it all in,
open-mouthed. This was what they had come for, to
listen to stories of askari ferocity. The more outrageous
the stories became, the deeper the silence and awe with
which they were received.
‘The war came very close to us,’ Pascal said. ‘Then it
went away. We have looked after a German officer and
the Rhodesian man I told you about. God looked after
all of them and us, and we have lost no one here at
the mission.’
The temperature dropped steeply after dark. Hamza
took the stone staircase to the top of the wall and felt
a relentless chill wind blowing on his face. A puddle on
the plain glowed eerily as it caught the light of the
moon. They were to stay there the night and head
back at dawn. The officer had satisfied his curiosity
about the mission and the missionaries, both evidently
safe in the hands of God. They left Kilemba with a gift
of sausages and a bottle of schnapps for the other
officers plus a supply of tobacco, which was the crop
Hamza had not recognised growing on the terrace.
Pascal had shown them the shed where they did the
curing but he would not let the askari take any. The
pastor looked after the tobacco himself and he knew
how to count. He would know if any was taken. Pascal
did not want the pastor to think he was a thief.
They left early and rejoined their troop without
encountering any difficulties. Later that night, after the
German officers had their feast, the Oberleutnant lay on
his cot while Hamza sat on his sleeping mat nearby. It
was time for their conversation class. The visit to the
mission and the schnapps had put the officer in a good
mood.
‘The pastor was a decent man but maybe a little stiff,’
the officer said.
‘Yes, he was a decent man,’ Hamza said.
‘What was he thinking, bringing his wife and small
children to such a distant, isolated and diseased place?
She was charming and kind. The orchards were
beautiful, hey? She looks after the fruit and the school.
It’s the coolness up here that helps, a perfect climate
for fruit. But the poor woman, she was terrified by the
rumours of the cannibal ruga ruga. It’s just British
propaganda, I told her, to reassure her. They are our
ruga ruga, our auxiliaries, we would not have dealings
with cannibals.’
‘It was good that you were able to reassure her,’
Hamza said. He had to speak from time to time
otherwise the officer became irritated and told him he
was having a conversation, not listening to a sermon. If
Hamza did not have anything to say, he repeated the
last thing the officer had said.
‘It’s possible, about the cannibalism, isn’t it? Anything is
possible when human beings go out of their minds as
we have been doing, let alone those blood-crazed ruga
ruga savages. That’s why we use them – because they
terrify our enemies with their utter savagery. Why would
they stop at eating the bodies of those they kill? Can
you imagine doing that, eating human flesh? I don’t
mean as an act of craziness in war or as a ritual of
primitive people who eat their dead enemies to gain their
strength, not as a custom, not as an item on your
customary menu, but as a desire, as a curiosity, as an
adventure. Can you imagine doing that?’
‘No, I can’t,’ Hamza said because the officer awaited
his reply.
The Oberleutnant smiled scornfully. ‘No, you don’t look
as if you would have the daring,’ he said.
*
The last few weeks of the war were a nightmare as
they ran and hid from the pursuing forces. The retreat
southwards drew the British and Allied Forces after them
all the way to the Ruvuma. The schutztruppe did not
just run and hide but were ruthless and successful in
punishing the British and their allies: mainly the South
Africans, the Rhodesians, the African KAR and even the
Portuguese who decided it was now time to join the
war, but they also took heavy casualties especially in the
fighting after Mahiwa. The carriers regularly deserted in
large numbers every few days, or perhaps they fell by
the wayside from hunger and weariness. It was not
always safe to desert. They were now in the land where
the schutztruppe fought the Wahehe nearly thirty years
before and then carried out the atrocities of the Maji
Maji war some fifteen years later. The people who
survived those times and who were now burdened with
further depredations on their lives and provisions were
worn down by schutztruppe violence and were not likely
to show kindness to deserting carriers.
The askari remained steadfast and loyal. It was a
wonder that they did. They had not been paid for
months or even years in some cases, not since Dar es
Salaam fell and the German administration lost the mint
there. Still, it was safer for an askari to remain in the
column despite the difficulties than to desert in such
hostile terrain. They were short of ammunition and food,
and their raids on enemy supplies and villages were no
longer well rewarded. They had exhausted the land,
which was now littered with starving or empty villages,
their supplies repeatedly plundered by the rival armies.
Beyond the Ruvuma, the schutztruppe turned westward
towards the Rhodesias, deliberately leaving scorched
villages behind them to thwart their pursuers, who
themselves were struggling to obtain supplies and fight
disease. Hamza’s troop was in the thick of the retreat,
and he was so exhausted by the constant movement
that at times he fell asleep on his feet. The troop was
all dressed in motley, including the German officers, and
looked more like a rabble-rout than an army. They were
now retracing their steps to the area they had been in
earlier in the year, near the Kilemba mission. It was
there that the final stages of Hamza’s war were played
out.
In the early hours of the morning, while it was still
dark, he smelled the rain before his eyes were open.
They woke to discover that most of the remaining
carriers had deserted during the night. It was not so
unexpected to Hamza or to anyone who understood
what they had been muttering incessantly for days.
They were exhausted by the relentless pursuit, by the
heavy loads and the degrading work they were required
to carry out. They were porters for hire but they had
not been paid, and in addition many of them had been
coerced into work they did not want to do. Casualties
were high among them. They were poorly fed and badly
equipped, most of them barefoot and dressed in
whatever rags they could loot or steal. They died from
disease and lack of care, and in the dire straits the
schutztruppe were in, they must have been desperate
to get away from an army facing defeat. They had
been deserting day by day in small numbers but this
was an organised flight, an admission that the
schutztruppe could no longer ensure their survival or
well-being. The Oberleutnant was furious and the other
Germans joined him in his rage at the indiscipline of the
carriers, as if they really believed that the ragged troop
they beat and despised and overworked owed them
loyalty.
‘There is no choice. The askari will have to do the
carriers’ work,’ the Feldwebel said, speaking with force
as was increasingly his manner. He addressed the
commanding officer, demanding his compliance with a
vehemence that was close to indiscipline. The
Oberleutnant shook his head and glanced at the three
other Germans still with him. The medical officer also
shook his head. He was very unwell now. In addition to
the malaria he was exhausted and suffering from a
gastric infection that repeatedly sent him into the bushes.
He had no medication left to ease his suffering. The
other two officers who had joined the troop in the last
months of tortured retreat remained silent. They were a
former music master who required the troop to exercise
every morning and who waved his handgun at them
while he shouted his commands, and a reserve
Leutnant, soft-spoken and unwell, a settler volunteer who
looked worn out by his struggles. Their silence was
respectful but its meaning was clear. The askari would
have to do it even though they all understood the iron
protocol that an askari did not carry loads. It was a
matter of honour. Just as the Europeans were
immovable on the sanctity of their prestige, so were the
askari. The Oberleutnant shook his head, as much in
consternation and uncertainty as because he knew there
was no other option. If they were to abandon their
supplies and equipment then they might as well march
directly to the nearest enemy outpost and surrender. It
would be safer than wandering unarmed among hostile
natives.
After a few minutes of fruitless reflection he gave in to
the tense and silent demand of his officers and gave
the order for the askari to carry the loads. The
Feldwebel smiled triumphantly and took charge. He
roared for the soldiers to come to attention and when
they did so he called out the new order. There was a
brief silence and then a breaking of ranks followed by
uproar. It was a long while before order was restored
by the outraged Feldwebel and the under-officers who
used their canes and even their guns to force the
askari into silence and then obedience. By then the rain
had arrived, and the men stood in two glowering files
while the officers faced them and Feldwebel Walther
berated them. It was left to the under-officers to
distribute the loads among the askari before they set off
on that day’s march. By then the rain was well set and
heavy, a cold driving rain which cut into them as they
trudged across the nyika towards the escarpment.
They made slow progress despite the officers’ shouting
and their canes. There was little respite from the
under-officers’ blows as the ombasha and the shaush
seemed to have lost their minds too, goaded into worse
ferocity by the Feldwebel. After a while the march settled
into a reluctant shuffle despite the best efforts of the
tiring under-officers. They stopped often, to rest or to
adjust loads, and at every stop there were grumbles
and scowling looks. They were not spared the usual
perils of the march – the bites and the heat, the
intermittent heavy rain, the aching feet from walking in
worn-out boots, the exhaustion. All these were even
more intolerable to the askari than usual now that they
were forced to do menial work. When they finally
stopped to make camp in the late afternoon, there was
a tense expectation of trouble. The men grumbled in
loud voices, wanting to be overheard, complaining that
this slave washenzi work was not what they had agreed
to when they joined up. They knew that the British
were encouraging them to desert. They saw leaflets in
the villages they raided for food and heard rumours
from other askari. They complained that the British did
not treat their soldiers with this kind of disregard. Such
provocation to their dignity was intolerable. Hamza was
surprised at how inconsolable their discontent was. It
seemed at times close to violence, and they all knew
what askari violence was capable of. In those last weeks
it seemed to Hamza that there hung over the officers a
fear of mutiny and massacre. He heard the Oberleutnant
say softly to the other Germans, ‘Everyone on the alert.
There could be trouble.’
The Feldwebel saw that Hamza had heard. Their
privations had made the Feldwebel lean and sinewy, his
face dark from the sun, his eyes shiny with a vigilant
light, his hair and beard long and dirty, his whole
manner full of menace and contempt for everyone,
including the Oberleutnant. To Hamza it seemed that his
hatred for the officer was transmitted to him too, that in
some way he exacerbated it. At that moment, when he
saw that Hamza had overheard the officer’s warning, his
look was sharp and threatening. Hamza looked away
hurriedly.
Squalls of rain turned into a thunderstorm as night fell.
They had made camp in a wood, which was not normal
practice but they needed cover from patrols. Some of
the trees there were vast. Earlier, when Hamza put his
arms around a trunk, he felt its heart beating and the
sap surging up to the branches. Lightning crackled in
the trees and weirdly illuminated the grove where they
had sought shelter. Hamza wondered if it was safe for
them to see out the storm here. He was wet through,
lying on ground that was soggy and sloshy with water
the earth could no longer absorb. Water dripped down
on him from the trees and he felt something crawling
over him but was too exhausted to move. Late into the
night, he heard sounds of movement and guessed it
was a small animal walking furtively about. Then all of a
sudden he knew that it was the askari and lay still and
silent where he was, pressing himself into the soft
ground as if that way he could make himself disappear.
When the lightning flashed he shut his eyes involuntarily,
but in the instant before he did so, he saw the huddled
shapes of men walking away into the trees. The furtive
noises went on for a few minutes and then stopped and
all he could hear was the splash of the rain on the
sodden ground. He knew the askari were deserting but
he lay still in the downpour, waiting for the dawn.
Somehow he must have fallen asleep because he
woke up suddenly to shouts and commands. It was just
about light and one of the under-officers, he thought it
was the shaush, had discovered the desertions and was
giving the alarm. Several people were quickly on their
feet, shouting and looking around in agitation, not yet
sure where the danger lay. Wamekimbia, wamekimbia,
the shaush was shouting in a panic. They have run
away, they have run away. The commanding officer
asked for a head count. The Feldwebel tramped about
in the rain, his sword in his hand, calling for the
under-officers to count the men. Traitors, traitors, he
called as he strode back and forth. Twenty-nine askari
had left during the night, leaving twelve behind. Two of
them were the ombasha and the shaush who had given
the alarm, both Nubi and long-serving schutztruppe. The
Feldwebel glared around the remaining troop and his
eyes rested on Hamza, who looked away to avoid eye
contact but it was too late.
‘Come here,’ the Feldwebel shouted, pointing at the
ground two steps in front of him. Hamza stepped
forward as ordered and stopped a pace or two short of
where the Feldwebel pointed. ‘He heard you telling us to
expect trouble,’ Feldwebel Walther said, addressing the
Oberleutnant. The Germans were standing in a scattered
group to one side facing the African troop, both the
music master and the Leutnant with revolvers in their
hand. ‘This traitor whore of yours betrayed us. He
incited them to go. He told them lies and they
deserted,’ Feldwebel Walther cried in rage. Then he
stepped forward and with a wild swing slashed at
Hamza who turned sharply to avoid the blow. It caught
him on his hip and ripped through flesh and bone. He
heard someone screaming and then his head hit the
ground with jarring force. He heard several voices
shouting and someone close by screaming dementedly.
He struggled for breath, heaving desperately but unable
to take in air. Then he must have passed out.
He came to for a brief dazed moment and saw the
medical officer on his knees beside him and felt arms
holding him. He came awake again amid angry voices
and shouted orders. When he regained consciousness
he found himself on a stretcher carried by two askari. It
was raining and water ran down his face. He was
awake for a while before he was able to arrive at that
conclusion, only gradually adding together his confused
impressions before lapsing into unconsciousness again.
On one of the subsequent occasions he was awake, he
saw the Oberleutnant walking beside the stretcher but
lost him again. Hamza was hallucinating by then,
perhaps he was not even on a stretcher. He saw the
Oberleutnant once more, walking beside him, and asked,
Sind Sie das? Is that you? His whole body was
trembling and rippling and he had the taste of vomit in
his mouth. The throbbing was worst on his left side but
it enveloped all of him. He had no strength left to move
any part of his body. He did not want to move any
part of his body, and it required a great effort to open
his eyes. Then they set him down on the ground and
the pain shot through his leg and forced a scream out
of him before he was even aware it was on its way.
He came fully awake then and saw the ombasha Haidar
al-Hamad on one knee beside the stretcher.
‘Shush wacha kelele,’ he said. ‘Shush shush
alhamdulillah. Not so much crying, askari.’ His face was
streaked with rainwater, his lips puckered as if hushing a
child.
As Hamza lay on the ground with the pain pounding
up one side of his body, suffocating with a feeling of
nausea in his mouth, he saw the Oberleutnant some
feet away, looking down at him prone on the stretcher
blanket. ‘Ja, ich bin es. Macht nichts,’ the officer said.
Yes, it’s me. Don’t worry.
Then Hamza passed out again. They stopped walking
some time during the night. He knew that because he
woke up briefly several times. It was so cold. He was
wet through, trembling and shivering uncontrollably. Later
he heard hyenas barking and a strange coughing he
could not identify. He heard the howl of an animal
having its life torn out.
It was no longer raining when they left at first light,
and as the sun heated him he felt some relief. He knew
now that the wetness was not only rain, that he was
bleeding heavily. Flies gathered around him, in his face
and on his body, and he did not have the strength to
wave them away. They found a rag to cover his face,
to keep away the flies. The shivering was now constant
and he drifted in and out of sleep. It was night when
he woke up and it took a long time to work out that
he was lying on a bed in a room dimly lit by an oil
lamp on a nearby table. He was trembling constantly,
groaning involuntarily as spasms of pain ran through
him. He was indifferent to everything else in the pain’s
embrace. Later he sensed the approach of dawn
through the open doorway, and in a while heard
someone enter and draw near.
‘Oh, you’ve woken up,’ the man said. It was a familiar
voice but he was too weary to open his eyes. ‘You are
safe now, brother. You are in Kilemba mission. It’s
Pascal here – you remember Pascal. Of course you do.
I will get the pastor.’
‘We did the best we could to stitch you up,’ the pastor
said, his sunburned face bent over Hamza. Pascal
translated even though Hamza could understand, their
voices drifting in and out of his hearing. ‘The bleeding
has … some seepage. We don’t know … damage inside
the bone … infection. It is important … fever down …
nourishment. Then we wait and hope for the best. I will
tell … officer that … awake.’
The officer came in and brought a chair to the side of
the bed. Hamza could not keep his eyes open and fell
into and out of consciousness, but each time he opened
his eyes the officer was still there at the side of the
bed. He had cleaned himself up but was dressed in the
ragged clothes he had worn in the field. He wore his
usual mocking smile as Hamza strained to hear. He
could follow the words better now. The Oberleutnant
said, speaking slowly, soothingly: ‘It seems that you will
survive after all. What a lot of trouble you are. Now you
will be lying here recuperating in this beautiful mission
while … go back … troop and continue our senseless
war. Zivilisierungmission … We lied and killed for this
empire and then called it our Zivilisierungmission. Now
here we are, still killing for it. Are you feeling a lot of
pain? Can you hear me? Blink your eyes if you … Of
course you can … a lot of pain, but the missionary and
his people … promised me. They are good people. They
will throw away your uniform so no one … you were
askari and they will give you plenty of food and a good
dose of prayer and you will soon be well.’
His words sounded unlikely and far away. Hamza
made no effort to speak.
‘Tell me, how old are you really?’ the officer said, and
his words suddenly came through very clearly. ‘Your
record says you were twenty when you joined up but I
don’t believe that.’
Hamza tried but it required too much effort to
summon the words.
‘No, I don’t believe you,’ the officer said. ‘I can order
fifty lashes for lying to an officer, a double hamsa ishirin.
You could not have been more than seventeen when
you joined up. My younger brother was that age when
he died. In a fire in the barracks. I was in there too.
Eighteen … a beautiful boy, and I think of him often.’
He stroked the stretched skin on his temple and then
sat stiffly for a few minutes as if he would not say any
more. His hand reached out towards the bed but then
he pulled it back. ‘It was a terrible fierce fire. He did
not want to be in the army. He was not suited to it.
My father wanted it. It was a family tradition … all
soldiers … and my young brother did not want to
disappoint him … a dreamer. It was very clever of you
to learn German … quickly and so well. He loved
Schiller, my brother Hermann. Well, you must rest now.
We’ll get ourselves ready to go.’
The ombasha Haidar al-Hamad and the other askari
came in to say goodbye. ‘You are a lucky boy,’ the
ombasha told him, using his regular snarling tone, his
lips at Hamza’s ear as if he did not want him to miss a
word. ‘Oberleutnant like you, that’s why you lucky.
Otherwise we throw you away in the forest, hamal.’
The other askari touched him on the arm and said,
‘Amri ya Mungu. Mungu akueke, sisi tunarudi kwenda
kuuliwa.’ It is God’s command. May God keep you, we
are going back to be killed.
When the officer came again, all set to depart, Hamza
heard everything he said. ‘Do you know why I told you
about my brother?’ He smiled one of his old sardonic
smiles. ‘No, of course you don’t. You are only an askari
and you are not allowed to speculate on the intimate
concerns of a German officer. You are piling up more
strokes on your record, for insolence as well as lying
and desertion’ He put a book down on the table on the
other side of the room. ‘I’ll leave this for you. It will
keep you company while you recuperate and it will help
you practise your German. Leave it here with the
missionary when you are well enough to go. Our war
will soon be over, and maybe I will come back and
collect it one day. I expect the British will intern us with
nigger criminals for a while, to humiliate us for being
such a nuisance to them, but then they will send us
home.’
*
Hamza was placed under the care of Pascal who came
to attend to him several times in the day, to give him
water or feed him the soup that the pastor prescribed
or to clean him. Hamza had only a vague and
intermittent sense of what was happening. His fever was
high and there was no part of his body that did not
ache. He could no longer locate the source of the pain.
The wound was on his left thigh and the whole of that
side of his body throbbed with a pounding pulse. He did
not have any feeling in his right leg and could not move
either arm. Sometimes it took an enormous effort even
for him to open his eyes. The pastor came to examine
him during the day and gave Pascal instructions on how
to clean him and make him comfortable. The faces of
the two men moved in and out of his vision, and day
and night merged into one another. Hamza felt a cool
hand on his brow at times but could not tell whose it
was.
He woke up one night in utter darkness and realised
he was the one who was sobbing in his nightmare. The
ground was covered in blood sucking at his feet and his
body was drenched in it. Limbs and broken torsos were
pressed against him, and voices were screaming and
shouting at a demented and terrified pitch. He stilled his
sobbing but could not stop the shaking of his limbs or
wipe away his tears. Pascal heard him and came in with
a lamp. Without saying a word, he lifted the sheet to
look at the dressing and then put the lamp down on
the table at the other side of the room. He came back
to Hamza and put his hand on his brow. He wiped
away his tears with a wet cloth and then cleaned the
mucus from his nostrils and his lips and made him drink
some water. Finally he pulled up a chair and sat beside
the bed but did not say anything until Hamza was
breathing quietly again.
‘You are safe here, my brother. Hawa wazungu watu
wema.’ These Europeans are good people. ‘They are
people of God,’ he said, then could not restrain a smile.
‘I am not the doctor but I think your fever is going
down. The pastor said when the fever goes down then
you are on the road to recovery. He knows about
healing. I have worked for him for a long time, from
down on the coast before he came to work in Kilemba.
His medicine saved me when I was hurt,’ Pascal said,
and stroked the scar on his neck. ‘He will make you
better too, but we will not leave everything in his hands.
We will ask God’s help as well. I will pray for you.’
Pascal shut his eyes and clasped his hands together and
began to pray. Hamza could see him clearly, as if a film
was cleaned off his eyes. He looked at Pascal sitting on
the chair beside him, face weathered and lined, eyes
closed as he mumbled the sacred words. Hamza looked
around the room – at the table with the lamp on it, at
the half-open door – and it was as if he was seeing all
these sights for the first time. In the midst of his
prayers Pascal reached out and took Hamza’s right
hand, which was lying on the bed, and lifted it up.
Hamza saw his hand firmly clasped in Pascal’s but could
not feel it. Pascal put his other hand on his brow, and
then he spoke aloud words of blessing.
‘Were you remembering bad times?’ he asked
afterwards. ‘I shall stay with you if you wish but maybe
it’s better to sleep. I will hear you if you call out. The
door is open and I am sleeping next door. Do you
want me to stay? I think tomorrow the pastor will be
very happy to see your eyes shining like this.’
The next morning the pastor took his temperature and
nodded approvingly at him. He removed the dressing
and looked less happy but put a brave face on it.
Pascal adjusted Hamza’s pillows while the pastor waited.
He was a thin neat upright man who held himself stiffly,
just as the officer had said. When Pascal had made him
comfortable, the pastor said in German, ‘Verstehst du?
Do you understand me? Do you want Pascal to
translate?’
‘I understand,’ Hamza said, and was surprised by the
strangeness of his own voice.
The pastor’s austere face lit up in a smile. ‘The
Oberleutnant told us you did. That’s good. Shake your
head if you don’t understand something I have said. I
think your fever has gone down but this is only the first
step in your recovery. It will take a long time,’ he said
severely as if Hamza might misunderstand and think
himself safe. ‘The bleeding must stop completely then we
will get you to move a little and do exercises. For now
there is still some seepage. This war makes everything
difficult. We will do what we can here until we can get
you to a hospital where you can be looked after
properly. The most important thing is to prevent
infection. Now we start you on solid food, one step at a
time. Can you move your right arm? This is where we
begin the exercises, with the right arm and right leg.
Pascal will teach you.’
Pascal was the main nurse. He spent the night in the
next room although he had his own quarters in the
compound. Every morning he cleaned Hamza and
helped him sit up, massaged his arms and his right leg,
talking to him in his unhurried and slightly solemn way.
Then he said a prayer with his eyes shut and
afterwards helped Hamza eat his meal of yoghurt,
sorghum and mashed pumpkin, which he told him the
other African workers in the mission also ate. After that
he made Hamza as comfortable as he could before
leaving to attend to his other duties in the mission.
Through the open window Hamza could see part of
the fig tree and part of the missionary’s home. On most
mornings he saw a small light-green heron standing
motionless for a long time on the ridge of the roof, then
for no reason he could see, it took off. He did not
know why, but the sight of the heron standing
motionless on the roof ridge filled him with sorrow. It
made him feel so alone. In the mid-morning the pastor
came to examine him. As he leaned close Hamza
smelled the mingled odours of soap and moist flesh and
a yeasty vegetable smell. The pastor thoroughly
examined the wound, exercised Hamza’s limbs,
interrogated him at length and looked serious and grave
whatever the result of his inspection.
Through the window Hamza heard a piano and the
voices of the little girls singing and practising and heard
their voices when they played on the patio. Sometime
during the day, their mother, the Frau pastor, came to
see him. She was a slim blonde-haired woman who
looked used to hard work and perhaps a little weary
but smiled easily. She usually brought him something on
a tin tray: biscuits and a tin mug of coffee or a small
bowl of figs or sliced cucumber. She talked to him about
the months they had spent on the coast before they
moved to Kilemba. Wasn’t the landscape here wonderful?
The chill at night kept away the mosquitoes, which was
such a blessing after the coast. Both the pastor and she
came from farming people and the climate here was
perfect for their crops. Do you not love it here? This
climate will do you good, you’ll see. She asked Hamza
questions and exclaimed at his German. Such excellent
diction. When she left Hamza always felt better than he
really was. When the Frau pastor could not bring him
his biscuits or fruit at the customary time, Witness’s wife
Subiri came over with the tin tray, which she put down
on the bedside table with a small benign murmur.
It was two weeks before he caught sight of the little
girls on the patio. One afternoon, after he had regained
some strength in his arms, he used the wooden
crutches Pascal had made for him and, with his help,
limped on one leg to the window. Hamza felt the blood
rushing through his left leg and an unexpected tingling
throughout his body. Out of the window he saw a
corner of the patio outside the missionaries’ home and
the two girls sitting on a mat there playing with a doll’s
house. He heard the mother’s voice talking to them but
did not see her. They were not aware that he was
watching. He placed his chair by the window and
sometimes sat there throughout the morning, watching
the comings and goings at the mission. As he became
more mobile and could hobble out of the infirmary to
catch the sun, he waved to the girls and they waved
back while their mother looked on. He remembered
what the officer said about how she worried for her little
girls and he saw how she hovered over them. He
sometimes saw the Frau pastor in the orchard by the
side of her house, the girls trailing after her with their
baskets.
One morning, as he sat outside on the chair he had
brought out of the infirmary, the pastor came to him
and stood squinting at him in the sun, regarding him
without saying a word for a moment. ‘We have just
heard that the war is over and Germany has
surrendered,’ he said. ‘Here in Ostafrika our commander
has only just surrendered to the British with his
remaining forces. It seems he did not know for three
weeks that the Armistice was agreed, but now it is all
over. God has kept you alive and we must thank Him
for that when so many have been taken. You must
always be grateful for that and that He has made this
mission the instrument of His mercy.’
Pascal told Hamza that there was to be a service to
pray for all who had perished and that he should come.
‘It will please the pastor and the Frau pastor and will
please God too. In addition to that,’ he said, ‘if you
don’t come, you will annoy the pastor. It will be better if
you make him happy. He is a cautious man and would
like to see you gone before the British and Rhodesians
come, as they surely will. If they find you here, they will
know you are a wounded askari and may even close
down the mission. If the pastor is not happy with you
he will let them take you into detention, but not if you
are one of his flock.’
A handful of the villagers who were part of the
mission’s congregation were back and the service was
attended by more than a dozen people, most of them
women. It was Hamza’s first time in the mission’s
chapel, an unadorned whitewashed room with a cross
on the wall and a lectern standing in front of it. He
thought he understood what Pascal was doing, saving
his life and at the same time looking to win Hamza’s
soul for the Saviour. He knew none of the hymns and
sat throughout the service with head bowed while the
congregation sang and the pastor prayed for the fallen.
Hamza’s condition improved steadily over the weeks
that followed although movement was often painful for
him in the damaged hip joint and across his groin. The
wound healed and he gained mobility with exercising but
the pastor said there must be some damage to tendon
or nerve that he was not expert enough to treat.
Hamza needed crutches to get about because the leg
was not strong enough to take his weight. Pascal said
that it looked as if he was going to be staying for a
while so they had better make him more comfortable.
With the help of Witness, Pascal walled up the lean-to
next to the quarters he shared with Juma, covering
wattle panels with a thick paste of mud, and then he
helped Hamza to move in there. You only need raise
your voice for one of us to hear you, he said.
The infirmary was now back to its proper use as the
local people began to come in for treatment. They heard
rumours of illness everywhere at the end of the war
although the worst of it had not reached Kilemba.
Hamza began to help out in the work of the mission,
things he could do sitting down at first: sorting tobacco
leaves, cleaning vegetables, mending furniture. He found
he had a certain skill with the latter and the Frau pastor
and Pascal found bits of furniture for him to mend. The
pastor watched his work with the tobacco leaves and
the furniture and approved in his taciturn way. He was
a naturally watchful man who kept his steady eyes on
what was going on in the mission but did not often
intervene to correct or rebuke publicly. In the evening
Hamza joined Pascal and the other workers as they ate
their food and talked about the chaos outside the
mission’s walls.
The Frau pastor said Hamza’s recovery was nothing
short of a miracle. He must have led a righteous life.
He knew she was teasing him and exaggerating his
recovery to lift his spirits, but he was thankful. The little
girls, Lise the elder and Dorthe the younger, brought
over their hymn sheets as he sat in the shade and
taught him the words, saying them to him and making
him repeat them when he could just as easily have
read them himself. He did his best with the hymns but
they were stern teachers and made him repeat the lines
several times. On one occasion they disagreed about
how to say a word, and without thinking he reached
over and took the sheet from Lise so he could see for
himself. She snatched it back instantly, as if without
thought. It’s mine, she said. In that instant as he looked
at the verse he had a vague memory of the officer
saying something about a book before he left. What
book was that? Was that a hallucination? Did he dream
about that?
‘Did the Oberleutnant leave a book for me?’ he asked
Pascal.
‘What book?’ he asked. ‘Can you read?’
A little, Hamza remembered, thinking of his officer.
‘Yes, I can read,’ he said.
‘I can read too. We have some pamphlets in the
chapel cupboard if you want something to read,’ Pascal
said. ‘Perhaps in the evening we can read together?
Sometimes I read for Witness and Subiri. They are such
devoted worshippers.’
‘No … I mean, yes, we can read together if you wish,
but did he leave a book for me? The officer,’ Hamza
said.
Pascal shrugged. ‘Why would he do that? Was he your
brother?’
The Frau pastor said to him, smiling, ‘Lise told me you
took her hymn sheet from her when she was teaching
you. She was outraged you took such a liberty. I
wondered if you wanted me to teach you how to read.’
‘I can read,’ Hamza said.
She raised her eyebrows slightly, briefly. ‘I didn’t
know,’ she said.
‘A little,’ he added humbly. ‘I need more practice. Did
the Oberleutnant leave a book for me?’
She looked away without replying and then said, ‘I’ll
ask the pastor. Why do you ask?’
He had seen in the second before she looked away
that her eyes lit up briefly, so he knew that he had not
hallucinated, that the officer had very likely left a book,
which they were keeping from him. Hamza shook his
head, as if he was uncertain or making light of the
matter. He did not want to make a fuss when it could
be his own feverish imagination at work. ‘I thought I
remembered something like that but I am not sure. My
memory is so confused.’
The more he thought about it, the more certain he
became, and the officer’s words came back to him in
fuller fragments, something about a fire and his younger
brother dying and how young he had been. Then he
said the book was for Hamza to practise his German
on, and after that something about nigger criminals.
Hamza could not remember what that was about. He
did his exercises and silently thanked the pastor and
Pascal for caring for him and crushed any hankering
desire for a book, or tried to. The wound was now
completely healed on the outside although he still needed
a crutch to support his weight. It had taken many
weeks, past Christmas and New Year and a visit by a
British officer, during which he was kept out of sight.
The British officer told the pastor that an influenza
epidemic was raging over the land and across the world
and that thousands had already perished. There was
chaos in Germany, which had banished the Kaiser and
declared itself a republic. There was chaos and war in
Russia after the revolution which murdered the Tsar and
his entire family. The whole world was in turmoil, he
said. They had food and supplies here and had better
stay put for the time being until clearer orders came
through.
It was the pastor who brought up the subject of the
book again, but he did not do so directly. At the end of
one of his regular examinations, the pastor suggested
they go for a walk together to give Hamza a little
exercise. It was late in the afternoon and they walked
over to the gate to the mission building and then to the
compound gate. The pastor stopped there, his eyes
running over the plain ahead and then to the
escarpment in the distance.
‘Sunset gives a benign aspect to the landscape, doesn’t
it? Yet it is a landscape where you know that nothing of
any importance has ever happened,’ he said. ‘It is a
place of no significance whatsoever in the history of
human achievement or endeavour. You could tear this
page out of human history and it would not make a
difference to anything. You can understand why people
can live contentedly in such a place, even though they
are plagued by so many diseases.’ He glanced at
Hamza and then smiled in a relaxed manner, at ease
with his own words. ‘At least, it was like that until we
came and brought them words of discontent like
progress and sin and salvation. The people here all
share one quality, they cannot hold an idea for long. At
times this can seem deceitful but it is really a lack of
seriousness, an unreliability, a failure in application. That’s
why it is necessary to repeat instructions and to
supervise. Just imagine, if we left here tomorrow they
will return like bush to their old ways.’
He glanced again at Hamza and then turned to walk
back. Hamza thought of him as a man torn between
the demand made on him to dominate and the inner
desire to give succour. He wondered if that was how it
was for European missionaries working with backward
people like them.
‘The officer who struck you must have been out of his
mind,’ the pastor continued as they strolled back. ‘The
Oberleutnant told me about him. He said he was an
officer of great competence but also a political man who
was full of grievances against the nobility and the ruling
class in Germany. Ours is a painfully divided country and
now, after the military defeat, grumblers have ousted
the Kaiser and chaos rules. It makes you wonder what
a man like the Feldwebel was doing in the Imperial
Army in Ostafrika. Perhaps he was attracted to violence
and the schutztruppe would have given him scope for
that. The Oberleutnant also told me that this officer was
difficult to control – that he hated the natives so much
he constantly broke the rules about what he was
allowed to do to them, including his treatment of the
askari. What he did to you was a crime according to
schutztruppe rules. The Oberleutnant told me it was as
if that man wanted to attack him when he struck you.
‘Do you understand everything I have said? Of course
you do. The Oberleutnant said your German was very
good and I have heard you speak it myself. Perhaps it
did not seem right to the other German officers that he
… befriended you, that his … protection of you was so
… intimate. I am only guessing, I don’t know, because
of something else the Oberleutnant said. Perhaps his
behaviour was seen as undermining German prestige. I
can understand how people might think like that. I also
understand that war brings about unexpected bonds.’
The pastor did not say more until they were back in
the infirmary and then he stood by the window, glancing
alternately out and back towards Hamza, avoiding eye
contact. ‘Yes, the Oberleutnant left a book for you as
you asked the Frau. He told me you could read but I
did not tell her that. The Oberleutnant said you were in
the wrong place in the schutztruppe and now that I
have seen you here for several months, I can see that
too. I have watched you recover your health with the
stoic patience of someone with intelligence and faith. I
don’t mean religious faith. I don’t know that about you
although I know Pascal has hopes of winning you over
to the Saviour. Pascal is a great romantic and a wise
man.
‘When I took the book away, I did not know this
about you and thought that the Oberleutnant was being
reckless, that he was led by his emotions because he
felt responsible for your injury. That was what made me
think that he had overextended his protection of you,
that it was that kind of … solicitude that had provoked
the Feldwebel to violence. The Oberleutnant said you
reminded him of someone he knew in his youth, and I
thought this showed too much sentiment for a German
officer speaking about a native soldier. I thought the gift
he left too valuable for a mere native. When my wife
told me that you asked for the book, I thought again
about what I had done. I did not tell her that the
officer told me you could read. She believed me when I
said that the book was too valuable to be left lying
about, which is true. When she told me you had asked
for the book, she also told me you could read. I said to
her that I knew that. So then she said, you must give
him the book back. It was left for him. I knew she
would say something like that, which was why I had
kept silent. I told her that I doubted very much if you
would be able to read the book with any true
understanding, which still remains my conviction. She told
me that was none of my affair and I should give the
book back to its rightful owner.’
The pastor smiled as he said this. ‘She defeated me at
every turn. Perhaps I should say, she convinced me
that I was wrong to have taken it away, and so I
determined to give it back to you and to explain fully
why I had taken it away from you in the first place. I
was mistaken. Perhaps in time you will be able to read
it with as much pleasure as the Oberleutnant
anticipated.’
He handed over a small book with a gold and black
cover: Schiller’s Musen-Almanach für das Jahr 1798 .
THREE
8
Their boat rounded the breakwater in evening twilight
and the nahodha ordered the sail lowered as he made
a cautious approach into harbour. The tide was out and
he was not sure of the channels, he said. It was after
the kaskazi monsoon and in the period before the winds
and currents turned south-easterly. Heavy currents at
that time of year sometimes shifted the channels. His
boat was heavily laden and he did not want to get
stuck on a sandbank or to hit something on the
bottom. In the end, after debating the matter with his
crew, he thought it was too dark to approach the quay
in safety, so they dropped anchor in shallow water and
waited for morning. There were lights on ashore and a
few people moving about on the quay, their elongated
shadows stretched out ahead and behind them in the
gloom. Beyond the quayside warehouses the town
sprawled and the sky was amber from the glow of the
setting sun. Further to the right the dimly lit shoreline
road shaped away towards the headland which after a
while ran out to the darkness of the country. Hamza
remembered that from the time before, how the road
ran past the house where he lived, and how then it
narrowed down to the tight aperture that opened out
into the interior.
Out to sea, the sky filled with stars and a huge moon
began to rise, illuminatingthe heaving water beyond the
breakwater and the frothing crest of the reef in the
distance. As the moon rose higher, it submerged the
whole world in its unearthly glow, turning the
warehouses and the quayside and the boats tied up
alongside into insubstantial silhouettes of themselves. By
then the nahodha and his three crew members had
eaten their meagre ration of rice and salt-fish, which
they shared with him, and settled themselves to rest,
stretching out in a tight cluster on the sacks of millet
and lentils which were their cargo. So he lay close too,
listening to their conversation and their profanities and
their gloomy homesick songs while the boat pitched with
the surge of the incoming tide. They fell asleep almost in
unison, their breaths drawing deeply a few times and
then suddenly falling silent. After the momentary stillness
which followed their voices, the boat resumed its
agonised creaking as the sea tugged and pulled at it in
its unrest. He lay on his good side but he could not
prevent the pain from returning, so he drew back from
the cluster of men and put some distance between
them. After a while he moved away completely for fear
of making them restless with his sleeplessness. He
wedged himself into a space that provided some
distracting discomfort from his aches, and somehow he
fell asleep.
At dawn they poled the boat in to the quayside,
working silently in the mauve light. The tide was now
fully in and the vessel rode high on the water. The
nahodha declined his offer to help with unloading the
cargo. He grinned with benign disdain, baring his stained
teeth with amusement.
‘Do you think this work is a joke?’ he said, looking
Hamza up and down in friendly mockery. ‘You need skill
to do this and the strength of an ox.’
Hamza thanked the nahodha who had agreed to give
him passage without payment and shook hands with the
crew. He walked carefully down the plank to the
quayside, his whole body tense with the effort of
suppressing the pain in his hip, now made worse by a
night spent wedged in the boat’s ribs. None of the men
had asked about his pain, although they could not have
failed to notice his limp. He was grateful for that
because sympathy in such situations required disclosure
in return. He did not look back as he walked along the
almost empty quayside but he wondered if the nahodha
and his crew were watching and perhaps talking about
him.
He walked through the port gates, which were open
and unguarded, and proceeded towards the town. He
passed people heading for the port, striding on their
way to work. This was not a part of town he knew
well. He had lived on the edges and hardly ever visited
the centre, but he did not want to seem uncertain or
lost so he too strode as purposefully as the pain in his
hip allowed and looked out for a familiar street or
building. At first the street he was on was wide and
lined with neem trees, but soon it became narrower with
other side-streets leading off it. As he walked further a
slight panic began to rise in him. People were coming
out of the side-streets, sure of their way, and he still
did not know where he was. It became difficult to
navigate as the crowd thickened, but also calming. He
was on a busy road so his hesitation and uncertainty
would not show as clearly. Sooner or later he was
bound to recognise something. When he stumbled on
the old Post Office building, he sat down on a step
outside with relief and waited for his panic to diminish.
Pedestrians and cyclists went past, mingling with the
occasional car that nudged its way patiently through the
crowd.
He sought the quiet streets after the Post Office, a
little clearer now on where he was but still not really
that sure. He walked aimlessly down cool shaded lanes
and past half-open doors and overflowing gutters. He
crossed wide roads past cafés crowded with breakfast
customers and then slipped again down narrow
alleyways where houses leaned towards each other with
an intimidating intimacy. Hamza was not at ease in
streets like these, with their aromas of cooking and
stagnant sewage and with the echoing voices of women
in their shuttered yards. He felt like an intruder. He
walked on anyway, relishing the anguishing strangeness
the alleys provoked in him, at once familiar and
forbidding. He realised after a while that he was walking
the same streets again and attracting interested glances,
so he forced himself out of the circuit he had stumbled
into and headed in a different direction.
It was mid-morning when he came to a yard whose
wooden gates stood wide open. An earth road ran past,
and across and to either side stood residential houses,
which made the yard appear part of the ordinary life of
the street. Something held him there for a while and
then he came closer, thinking this looked a likely place
to find work or at least a moment’s rest. Through the
open gateway came a clamour of voices and the
banging of hammers and an air of honest labour. Two
men were changing the wheel of a van jacked up on a
pile of bricks, one was on his knees with the wheel in
his hands, the other standing beside him, holding a
spanner and a hammer in readiness. The big one on
his knees was talking in boisterous tones. It was from
him alone that the clamour came. His head was turned
towards his companion whose lips were parted on the
brink of laughter. The companion’s head was large for
his body, so large that it was impossible to overlook.
Hamza glanced towards them and heard enough of the
mockery and swagger and tortured laughter to recognise
the familiar tones of street banter meant to be
overheard. The two men paid no attention to him as he
stood nearby, or perhaps pretended not to notice him.
Beyond the two men and the van, and under a young
coconut tree in a corner of the yard, a boy was
hammering nails into a packing crate. There were three
other crates nearby already secured and an open one
full of wood shavings. Another two youths, no more
than boys, were carrying a hot metal pot between two
poles and heading towards the building occupying the
whole of one side of the large yard. From the smell he
guessed the pot contained oil or varnish. The building’s
doors stood wide open and he could hear timber being
worked inside, the sound of a saw and a plane and
intermittent hammering, and he could smell the
astringent perfume of wood shavings. A small door at
one end of the workshop building was open, and
through it he saw a man sitting at a desk, bent over a
ledger, wire-framed glasses resting low on his nose.
Hamza limped towards him, walking slowly, taking short
steps, making every effort to disguise his injury.
The man behind the desk was dressed in a loose
long-sleeved shirt of thin cotton material, and he looked
cool and comfortable. His head was shaved and his
scraggy little beard was flecked with grey. His
embroidered cap lay on the desk beside the ledger. He
was in his early thirties, sturdily built and strong-looking.
Bent over his desk in the way he was, he seemed like
a man completely absorbed in his own affairs, every
inch the owner of the yard. Hamza stood in the
doorway without speaking, waiting for the man to look
up and invite him to enter the office, or to chase him
away. It was a cool morning and he had become used
to waiting. He stood there for what seemed several
minutes, cautioning himself against showing any sign of
impatience or restlessness. The man looked up sharply,
as if he had been aware of him all along but had
suddenly run out of patience. He perched the glasses on
top of his head and looked at Hamza with the unhurried
self-assurance of a man who had found his rightful place
in the world. He frowned briefly but did not speak,
waiting in turn for Hamza to announce himself and his
business. After a moment he tilted his chin slightly,
which Hamza took to be a high-handed invitation to
speak.
‘I am looking for work,’ he said.
The man cupped his hand round his left ear, for
Hamza had spoken softly.
‘I am looking for work, please,’ Hamza repeated more
loudly, and added the courtesy because he wondered if
the man wanted him to plead, wanted him to show
some humility.
The man leaned back and folded his hands behind his
head, flexing his shoulders, taking a moment’s respite
from his labours. ‘What kind of work are you looking
for?’ he asked.
‘Any kind of work,’ Hamza said.
The man smiled. It was a bitter, disbelieving smile, that
of a tired man about to have his time wasted. ‘What
kind of work can you do?’ he asked. ‘Labouring?’
Hamza shrugged. ‘Yes, but I can also do other work.’
‘I don’t need labourers,’ the man said abruptly in a
tone of dismissal and turned back towards his ledger.
‘I can read and write,’ Hamza said, a hint of defiance
in his voice, and then, remembering his circumstances,
added: ‘Bwana.’
The man looked directly at him and waited, wanting
more precision, more details. ‘What class did you reach?’
he asked.
‘I didn’t go to school,’ Hamza said. ‘I was taught a
little … then I learned by myself mostly.’
‘How did you do that? Oh, never mind, can you keep
book?’ the man asked, pointing at his ledger, but
Hamza knew he was not serious. He did not think a
merchant would allow a stranger to keep book for him.
‘I can learn,’ he said after a long moment.
The man sighed and took the glasses off the top of
his head. He rubbed the bristles on his scalp with his
right palm, making them rustle softly. ‘Can you work
wood?’ he asked. ‘I could use someone in the
workshop.’
‘I can learn,’ Hamza repeated, and the man smiled
again, less bitterly this time, perhaps even a little kindly.
Hamza felt a small spasm of hope from that smile.
‘So you can’t work wood but you can read and write.
What was the last work you did?’ he asked.
Hamza had not expected this question and he realised
he should have done. He took so long to reply that the
man pushed his glasses back on to his nose and bent
over his ledger again. Hamza stood where he was, just
inside the doorway, and waited while the man wrote
something. He wondered if he should go before the
man became irritable and ugly with him, but he was
unable to move as if paralysed. Then after several
minutes the man looked long and wearily at him, capped
his pen, picked up his cap and said to Hamza, ‘Come
with me.’
That was how he so unexpectedly came to work for
the merchant Nassor Biashara. The merchant later told
Hamza that he took him on because he liked the look
of him. Hamza was then twenty-four years old, without
money and without anywhere to stay, in a town he
once lived in but knew very little of, tired and in some
pain, and he could not imagine what the merchant could
like about the look of him.
Nassor Biashara led him out to the yard and called to
the boy by the packing crates. The merchant was
shorter than he looked bent over his desk but he
strode out with brisk, urgent steps and was on to the
boy before he had begun to move towards them.
‘Take this man to the warehouse. What did you say
your name was? Tell Khalifa I will be along there
shortly,’ the merchant told the boy, whose name turned
out to be Sungura although it was not his real name.
Sungura meant rabbit. It also turned out that he was
not a boy but an adult man the size of a slim twelveor thirteen-year-old whose mobile, ashen and weathered
face told a different story from the impression formed
on a first casual glance. There was something familiar
about his features, which were angular and sharp, with
high cheekbones, a pointed chin, thin nose, furrowed
brow: a Khoi face. Hamza had seen many Khoi faces in
recent years. In the frail-looking body of an ailing
teenager the face looked a little sinister. It was more
likely that it was not a Khoi face but of a kind he had
not come across before, from Madagascar or Socotra or
a far-flung island he had never heard of. Their world
was full of strange faces since the recent war, and
especially in these towns along the shores of the ocean,
which had always drawn people from across the water
and across the land, some more willingly than others.
But perhaps it was nothing like that, and it was just the
face of a man who had grown up in want and pain, or
who had been afflicted with one of the many agonies
which stalked human life.
Sungura led off and Hamza followed. As they passed
the men fixing the van, the big one on his knees made
a sucking, kissing noise and rolled his eyes in drooling
suggestive fashion at Sungura, signalling barely controlled
desire. His face was round and roughened by tough
bristly stubble. The second man, who was dressed in
ragged calf-length calico shorts, laughed and giggled
foolishly, and it was clear that he was the vassal in the
court of the bully of the yard. Sungura did not say
anything and his expression did not change but Hamza
sensed that his body cringed. Something about his
manner told Hamza that he was used to this treatment,
and that he was often required to carry out degrading
chores. After they turned out into the road, he slowed
and glanced at Hamza’s hip. It was to tell him that he
had seen his limp, one maimed person picking out
another, and he was inviting him to set the pace.
They walked slowly through dusty crowded streets lined
with shops overflowing with merchandise: cloths, frying
pans and stew pans, prayer mats, sandals, baskets,
perfumes and incense, with every now and then a
fruit-seller or a coffee-stand. The morning was warming
up but not yet hot and the crowds were still
good-natured in their jostling and shoving. Carts barged
their way through pedestrians, their drivers calling out in
warning, bicycle bells tinkled and cyclists snaked a
passage through the press of bodies. Two elderly
matrons shuffled on unconcernedly and the crowd
parted around them as if they were rocks in the middle
of a stream.
It was a relief after several minutes of walking to enter
a wide, shaded lane that led to an empty clearing
fringed with a cluster of warehouses. There were five of
them, three in one building and the other two standing
separately but side by side. Nassor Biashara’s warehouse
was on the corner of the clearing by the lane, standing
on its own. The unpainted wooden door was half-open
but it was too dark to make out anything in the gloomy
interior. Sungura walked up to the doorway and called
out. After what seemed to Hamza like several minutes,
he had to call again before a man emerged from the
shadows of the warehouse. He was a tall thin man of
about fifty, clean-shaven and with greying hair. He was
neatly dressed in a checked shirt and khaki trousers,
more like an office-worker than a warehouseman. He
looked from one to the other of his visitors, his face
unfriendly and frowning, then said to Sungura, ‘What are
you making all that noise for? What’s wrong with you,
you idiot?’ His tone was fussy and scornful, as if at any
moment he was likely to spit out something foul. He
pulled a clean handkerchief from his pocket and wiped
his hands.
It had not seemed like such a lot of noise to Hamza
but Sungura did not protest. ‘Bwana Nassor said to
bring him. He’s coming himself. I’m going now,’ he said
and turned to leave.
‘Hey, what are you talking about?’ the warehouseman
said but Sungura walked on without replying or looking
back, his gait diffident yet obstinate. The man made a
snorting noise at Sungura’s retreating back and said
something Hamza did not fully catch. The warehouseman
raised his arm in greeting to Hamza, pushed the door
open wider and pointed to a bench just inside. He sat
on it as instructed and felt the man’s eyes on him,
studying him.
‘What’s this about? Are you a customer?’ he asked.
Hamza shook his head.
‘What did he send you for?’
‘I’ve come to work,’ Hamza said.
‘He didn’t tell me anything about that.’
The man he took to be Khalifa waited for him to say
more and then shook his head irritably when Hamza did
not. He stood still for a moment longer, bringing himself
under control, then nodded slowly and repeatedly with
an air of exasperated resignation. After another look
followed by a deep sigh, he walked back into the
shadows of the warehouse. It seemed such an
unnecessary performance, a sour man by all
appearances. If this was the one the merchant tajiri
wanted him to work for then so be it. He would learn.
From the outside it did not seem like a large
warehouse, no more than sixty paces long perhaps, the
size of a six-roomed barracks block. It was built of coral
stone and mortar, some of it exposed where the outer
skin had eroded, and was roofed with tin. If there were
any windows they were closed and only diffused light
entered from under the eaves. As Hamza’s eyes
became used to the gloom, he saw crates and boxes
on the near side, and stacks of bulging gunny sacks
further inside. He thought he could smell timber and
hide and perhaps engine oil, and the deep smell of
weathered jute fibre. The smells brought back memories
of his earlier times in this town. He looked out into the
clearing. A man was walking across the far end of it
but otherwise there was no movement. It was a large
clearing, perhaps seeming more so because it was
empty. The doors to all the other warehouses were
closed. It was a forlorn, silent place, abandoned and
somehow derelict although none of the buildings were
damaged. It was a sight that drained resolve.
He shook his head to clear his mind of such thoughts,
resisting his tendency to gloom. Grief reduces resistance,
Pascal used to say. He smiled as he remembered
Pascal. He was fortunate to have the prospect of work
so soon after arriving in the town although he should
remain cautious, not count his blessings before he was
sure of the job. It had been many months of
wandering, many years, and now he was making yet
another start in the company of a spectral host of
accusers. His return to the town was unexpected. When
he fled it had seemed like an undoing of a life but for
now it has ended with the futility of him returning to
where he had been before, older, half-broken,
empty-handed.
Hamza did not know what job the merchant wanted
him for. He waited on the bench with eyes lowered
from the glare, grateful for the shaded doorway, grateful
for the rest. The pain in his hip was easing a little, he
was sure of that. It did as the day moved on and he
walked around, but he could not do that for long. He
still needed frequent rests. He would just have to
manage the pain better. The alternative was to allow it
to overwhelm him and turn him into an invalid, as the
war had done to so many. That did not bear thinking
about. It had taken a long time, but he had eventually
healed. Then, after leaving the mission, he had pushed
himself too soon and lost track of what his wounded
body could bear. He would have to manage better. As
he sat on the bench he knew he was nearly worn out,
distressed, on the verge of exhaustion. His head
pounded and his eyes ached. He needed to sleep. His
body had become used to subsisting on very little food
but not yet to a permanent lack of sleep.
Hamza thought he heard faint noises from further back
in the dark warehouse and wondered how Khalifa could
see in the gloom, how he could move about so silently
without stumbling into the merchandise. He had been
sitting on the bench for a while when he saw a
movement out of the corner of his eye and he was
startled to see that Khalifa was standing a few feet
away from him, just inside the warehouse, eyes glowing
as he regarded him. Hamza looked away first, and for
a while thought he could feel Khalifa’s eyes on the side
of his head. When he turned around again there was
no one there. He was not alarmed. Khalifa seemed too
fastidious and proper to be a menace, and Hamza was
weary and only slightly bemused by his eccentric
behaviour.
The merchant Nassor Biashara was in a hurry when
he arrived, wearing a cream linen jacket and cap, on
his way to do other errands. Hamza stood up from the
bench, ready to carry out instructions. ‘Khalifa!’ the
merchant called out. ‘Where is he? Khalifa!’
He appeared after a moment. ‘Naam, bwana mkubwa,’
he said, his tone ironic and mocking. Yes, big master.
‘This is our new man,’ Nassor Biashara said. ‘I’ve sent
him here to help you in the stores.’
‘Help me with what?’ Khalifa asked insolently. ‘What are
you up to now?’
The merchant took no notice of this truculence,
speaking in a firm business-like voice. ‘Have you cleared
a space for the new delivery? He could help you with
that. It should be here in the next few days.’
‘It’s done,’ Khalifa said, wiping his hands for emphasis.
‘Sawa,’ Nassor Biashara said. ‘The van will come for
the timber as soon as they’ve changed the wheel. It
could be a while because they have to take the other
tyre to the mechanic to be repaired. That van is costing
me a fortune. Anyway, show him the ropes. He could
help with the loading. He’ll be our night-watchman from
now on. Bring him to the yard after you lock up so
he’ll know the way. I have to go to the bank now.’
‘What’s your name?’ Khalifa asked after the merchant
left.
‘Hamza,’ he said.
‘Hamza what?’ Khalifa asked with what Hamza thought
was surprising rudeness. In his turn he shrugged. He
was not obliged to reply to such questions, asked in
such a tone. He sat back down on the bench. ‘Who
are your people?’ Khalifa asked, as if he thought Hamza
had not understood his question.
‘That is none of your concern.’
Khalifa smiled. ‘I see – something to hide, eh? Never
mind. You can start by sweeping up this litter,’ he said,
indicating the area in front of the warehouse doors,
which was mostly litter-free. ‘You’ll find the broom behind
the door … and don’t make too much dust. Haya haya,
you haven’t come here for a rest.’
Hamza was bemused by such rudeness. He swept the
yard as instructed and made a small pile of dust and
litter beside the doorway, then sat back down on the
bench. When the van came for the timber, Khalifa
opened a barred window and the warehouse was
flooded with the late-morning light. The loud-mouthed
one of the pair Hamza had seen earlier in the yard,
whose name was Idris, idled about in the shade of the
warehouse, smoking and shouting heckling
encouragement while Hamza helped his ragged partner
load up the timber. This was in the form of roughly
planed planks headed for the workshop. They were pale
pink in colour and Hamza could not resist bending down
to breathe in the scent of the wood. Khalifa stood
beside the warehouse door and followed them with his
eyes but did nothing to help. It only took a few minutes
to load the van and afterwards Khalifa sat on the bench
while Hamza sat nearby on a crate. It did not seem as
if there was anything more to do. He wanted to ask
Khalifa the name of the timber but the look of quivering
disapproval on his face restrained him.
‘Our night-watchman,’ repeated Khalifa, smiling
disdainfully at Hamza before looking away across the
clearing. ‘What is it that he has really brought you here
to do? What is he up to? Has he promised you a job
as a warehouse keeper? Our night-watchman! One look
at you and the robbers will run as fast as they can in
the other direction, terrified for their lives, eh? Our tajiri
has hired a night-watchman! Why now? There has been
valuable merchandise in here all these years and he
never once thought of hiring a watchman before. He’ll
give you a sheet of marekani to cover yourself and a
little stick and make you sit here all night with all the
shetani and the ghosts that live here. He gets nervous
about his money sometimes. It’s this new equipment
he’s buying, I expect. You don’t look like a watchman.
Watchmen have bulging thighs and shining skin and big
testicles. I can’t think why he chose a weakling like you
to be his watchman.’
Hamza smiled at this unprovoked attack but could not
think of anything to say in protest. He would not have
chosen himself to be a night-watchman either.
‘You look ill,’ Khalifa said. ‘You must’ve prodded some
better instinct in him, made him remember anxious times
of his own. He gets stupid ideas sometimes. Did you
hear him being the big businessman? I’m going to the
bank now. What a busy man!’
Khalifa sighed heavily and leaned back against the
warehouse door with his eyes shut. His face was narrow
and ascetic in some way, the face of an abstemious
man perhaps or one who had known bitterness and
failure. Hamza sighed silently at the thought of working
for such a sullen and peevish man.
‘There’ll be nothing here soon,’ Khalifa said after a long
silence, working his mouth as if preparing to spit
something out. ‘You should’ve seen this place as it was
before: full of traders and people mingling and
bargaining – the coffee-seller with his stand over there,
carts bringing goods from the port, the fruit-seller with
his gari, the ice-cream vendor with his trolley, and
everywhere noise and bustle and loud talk. That place,
boarded up now, was a café and there were people
selling juice and cassava in the middle there. There was
a stand-pipe to one side here with water clean enough
to drink. Now look at this place. No one comes here.
Everywhere is as dry as a bone. Those warehouses
there –’ he said, indicating the block of three ‘– a
contractor has taken them over from the Bohra tajiri
Alidina. What a man that was! Have you heard of the
Bohra Alidina? Those were his warehouses, although he
had stores and other warehouses in countries all over
these parts, all the way to the Great Lakes. He was
trading with India and Persia and England and Germany.
Now they store cement and toilets and pipes in there
when once they were full of grain and sugar and rice.
You’ll see, every other day the contractor sends a truck
here and they load it up and take things away to
furnish rich people’s mansions. People were coming and
going from here once all the time, buying and selling,
the whole place bustling with life and trade, but now it’s
just where our betters store what we can’t afford to
have.’
Khalifa was silent again for a while, lost in his anger,
glancing at Hamza now and then with a look of
discontent as if expecting a response from him. ‘What’s
wrong with you? Can’t you speak?’ he asked finally, and
sucked in his cheeks and worked his jaws as if he was
chewing something acid and sour. Hamza sat there
without a word. After a while, as they waited silently, he
felt Khalifa’s anger recede and heard his breathing
change and its measure subside. When he began to
speak again it was with far less rancour than before, as
if he had resigned himself to whatever had once irritated
him.
‘That other store, that belongs to the Chinaman.’ He
pointed to the other detached property. ‘He keeps dried
shark fin and sea cucumber and vipusa in there – you
know, rhino horn – and those other things they like in
China. He keeps them in there and then every few
months, when he has enough, he loads it all on to a
ship and sends it off to Hong Kong. I don’t think it’s
legal but he knows how to stay out of trouble and how
to keep the Customs boys happy. They like those things
in China, to make their zub hard. He never rests, that
Chinaman, nor does he let any of his family rest. Have
you seen his house? There are trays of noodles drying
in the backyard, flocks of ducks waddling about in the
mud in front, his grocery kiosk is open from dawn until
late at night … and all the time he is dressed in shorts
and a singlet like a labourer, working every hour of the
day and night. Have you heard him speak? He sounds
just like you and me … none of that fong fong fong
you expect from a Chinaman. And all his children are
the same. If you listen to them speak with your eyes
closed, you’d never guess that you were listening to a
Chinaman. Have you heard them speak?’
‘No, I haven’t,’ Hamza said.
Khalifa looked at him for a moment then he said,
‘Don’t you know the Chinaman? I don’t remember
seeing you before. Are you a stranger here?’
Hamza was silent for a while. ‘Not really,’ he said.
‘Not really what? Still hiding,’ Khalifa said, smiling
wearily. ‘Why don’t you just lie? It’s easier that way and
you save yourself trouble. Just lie and then it’s over.
Otherwise it sounds like you’re hiding something.’
‘I’m not a stranger here,’ Hamza said. ‘I lived here a
few years ago but then I went away.’
‘Who are your people?’ Khalifa asked again.
‘They live a long way away,’ Hamza said, lying as
Khalifa had instructed him to do.
‘Have you wandered far? You look as if you have,’
Khalifa said, a look of mild disdain on his face. ‘Tell me,
were you in the war? That’s what I thought when I
saw you. You look like a vagrant.’
Hamza shrugged and did not reply, and Khalifa did not
press him. Soon after the call for midday prayers, he
locked up and they walked back to the main yard. It
was now hot but not unbearably so and the walk was
pleasant until they reached the busy road with the
shops. The overflowing wares added to the congestion
on road and pavement. The chaos and din and the
irritable invective of the noon crowds forced them to
shove and force themselves past people who were also
intent on making their way home or else to the market
or the mosque as quickly as they could. Nassor
Biashara was not back from the bank yet, so while
Khalifa sat outside the merchant’s office to wait, Hamza
went to the now silent workshop, drawn there by the
smell of wood and resin. He found an elderly man
sitting in a corner embroidering a cap. He looked up
over his glasses and returned to his embroidery. Hamza
assumed this was the carpenter having his lunch break.
He spoke a greeting and made ready to retreat.
Around the workshop were various wooden items: a
recliner, small tables, an ornately carved bench, a
sideboard with smaller items on it – bowls, cabinets –
some of them in wood the colour of bronze and some
in a pale wood, many of them in states of
incompleteness. It was as if the carpenter was working
on several items at the same time, or else there was
more than one carpenter.
The smell of wood was very strong here and Hamza
wondered what kinds they were. His furniture repair
work at the mission had been the fumblings of a novice,
fixing what had loosened or fallen apart. He knew
nothing about timber but he thought its smell
wholesome, natural. He picked up a handful of shavings
from the floor and inhaled them. The elderly man looked
up from his embroidery and said, ‘Mvule’ and Hamza
stored the name away gratefully. He went towards
another pile of shavings, which was where the astringent
smell was coming from, and before he even reached it
the elderly man said ‘Msonobari’ and then smiled as if
he was playing a game. ‘Mvule lasts forever, it’s harder
than metal,’ he said. ‘Are you looking to buy?’
‘No, I have come to work for the merchant,’ Hamza
said. The elderly man made a grunting noise and
returned to embroidering his cap.
When Hamza went out to the yard again, he saw that
Khalifa had gone. He sat in the shade to wait for the
merchant’s instructions and was still there when the
leisurely return to work began in the afternoon. A man
he had not seen before walked through the yard to the
workshop. His hair was jet black and shiny, tied back in
a ponytail. He strolled in casually, quite unhurried, and
shouted obscenities at Sungura as he walked past. Hey,
you little bastard, tell your mother to oil herself well. I’ll
be calling for her later tonight. Sungura cackled with
laughter like a teased child, exposing a mouthful of
tangled teeth.
Hamza sat waiting throughout the afternoon. He saw
Idris and his sidekick stretch out in the van for an hour
or two before making themselves scarce. He was still
there when the old carpenter and his slick-haired
assistant closed the workshop and left. He felt foolish
waiting for so long but he had nowhere to go, and he
was tired, and he did not know if the merchant even
remembered his existence. The merchant returned to
the yard some hours later, just as the muadhin was
calling for the afternoon prayer. Sungura was the only
other person there, waiting to lock up. Nassor Biashara
was surprised to see Hamza waiting for him.
‘What are you doing here?’ he said. ‘Have you been
here all this time? What’s the matter with you? Go
home now. You can start at the warehouse tomorrow.’
9
Hamza slept by the doors of the warehouse that night
because he had nowhere else to stay. He wandered the
streets for a while looking for places he knew, but he
recognised very little and often did not know where he
was. He followed the movement of the crowds and after
a while found himself unexpectedly on the shore road.
He followed that with a small thrill of recognition and
walked on to look for the house where he had lived in
his youth, but he could not find it. He thought he had
found the right area but perhaps the house was
knocked down and something else built in its place. It
was then a town of Deutsch-Ostafrika and was now a
British colony, but that alone did not explain the
disappearance of a house with a walled garden and a
shop at the front. It was as if the town had grown
beyond itself and some of its neighbourhoods had
disappeared. He had only been away for seven years
and the town could not have changed so much in that
time. Or perhaps he was looking in the wrong place. He
had rarely gone out of the house when he lived here
before, had led a frightened life at the back of a shop,
and perhaps he had forgotten the few streets he knew.
Perhaps he had lost part of his memory along the way,
overwhelmed by the cruelties he had lived through in
the meantime. He was so tired and maybe that added
to his impression that everything here was strange.
Some people greeted him as if they knew him, with a
smile, a friendly wave or even a handshake, but he
knew they could not. They must have mistaken him for
someone else. In any case, he did not know them.
He returned to the warehouse as it was getting dark.
There was a streetlamp at the far corner of the clearing
and although the light it cast was dim and multiplied the
shadows, it also eased the unnerving emptiness to some
extent. He knew there was a mosque down that far
lane because he had heard the muadhin calling at noon.
He went in there to wash and then joined in the
prayers. People shuffled up to make space for him and
he stayed for a while, for the company. When the
mosque locked up for the night, he returned to the
warehouse and stretched out by the door in the place
he had swept earlier in the day, using the cloth bag
with all his possessions in it as a pillow. He hardly slept
despite his weariness. His side ached and the mosquitoes
did not spare him. Cats prowled nearby, yowling out of
sight and now and then glaring at him from the
darkness. When he dozed he was unsettled by dreams:
falling through dark emptiness, crawling over fallen
bodies, hectored by a face twisted with implacable
hatred. There were shouts, blows and distant hills
overflowing with translucently red viscera.
He was often visited by disturbing dreams. It was a
relief when he heard the dawn call to prayers and went
to the mosque again to clean up.
When Khalifa arrived, he was surprised to see Hamza
sitting dejectedly on the ground, leaning against the
warehouse door. He stopped dead and stared,
exaggerating his astonishment. ‘What are you doing here
so early? It’s not even seven o’clock,’ he said. ‘Do you
live nearby?’
Hamza was too weary to dissemble. ‘I slept here,’ he
said, indicating the ground.
‘He didn’t ask you to,’ Khalifa said. ‘What are you?
Some kind of hooligan, sleeping in the streets?’
Hamza did not reply. He rose carefully to his feet and
looked away from Khalifa’s outraged stare.
‘He wants a watchman after the delivery arrives,’
Khalifa said, speaking precisely as if he was explaining
something to a simpleton. ‘He’s starting a new line in
fishing equipment and he’s afraid one of these fishermen
will break in and steal it. They’re always half-crazy with
hashish, the fishermen, but I don’t think they would do
that. There was no need for you to sleep here. He
didn’t ask you to, did he?’
‘I didn’t have anywhere else to sleep,’ Hamza said.
Khalifa glared in response, waiting for him to wheedle
and moan, and when he did not, took a step towards
the doors and undid the padlock while Hamza hastily
moved out of the way. Khalifa opened one panel and
stepped inside for a moment before he came bursting
out again. ‘What do you mean, you didn’t have
anywhere to sleep? Don’t you know anyone? I thought
you said you lived here.’
‘Many years ago, outside of town. I don’t know if
those people are still alive,’ Hamza said. ‘If they are, I
don’t think they will want to hear from me.’
Khalifa was silent for a little while, irresolute, frowning,
his eyes ablaze with questions. ‘So you just sleep in the
streets, like a vagabond? Who are your people? You
can’t sleep in the streets,’ he said angrily. ‘You’ll get
hurt. Don’t you know anyone you can go to? Don’t you
have any money?’
‘I’ve only just arrived,’ Hamza said as if that were
explanation enough.
‘Why didn’t you ask him for money yesterday? Nassor,
why didn’t you ask the merchant for an advance?’
Khalifa asked in exasperation, and when Hamza did not
answer he asked, ‘When did you last eat? What are
you, an idiot, some kind of a saint?’ He took hold of
Hamza’s right wrist and slapped a coin in his palm. ‘Go
find yourself a café and get a cup of tea and a bun.
Go, go away from here, come back later.’
Hamza had been ashamed to ask, in case the
merchant refused or withdrew his offer of a job. He had
not even asked what his wages were to be. He did not
say that to Khalifa but went to find a café as instructed
where he had a bun and a large mug of tea. When he
returned Khalifa ignored him – probably, Hamza
imagined, because he thought him too pathetic to bother
with. Later in the morning the contractor’s truck
appeared and three of his men loaded up bags of
cement and metal poles and then drove off, the driver
leaning on the horn as if he was negotiating a crowded
road. The Chinaman also turned up, fully dressed in
shirt and trousers, and stopped to talk with Khalifa, who
as they spoke glanced at Hamza, as if to say, Listen to
him … just like one of us, no fong fong fong from this
Chinaman.
The van from the merchant’s yard also came to
deliver the crates of bowls and small cabinets Sungura
had been busy packing the day before, and to collect
some more timber. Khalifa showed Hamza where to
stack the crates, and explained what other merchandise
was stored in the warehouse and how it was distributed
and organised. Here the timber, there the crates of
ornamental caskets, over there the sacks of millet, and
here on the shelves straw-wrapped packages of
frankincense. He showed him the ledger where all the
goods coming in or out were recorded. Can you read?
he asked. Hamza nodded and Khalifa gave him a sharp
look. Can you write? he asked. Hamza nodded again
and Khalifa smiled bitterly, his suspicions about the
merchant’s motives for employing Hamza now confirmed.
He is lining you up to take over from me, isn’t he? One
way or another, it was a busy morning on Hamza’s
second day and the clearing was a place of work rather
than a silent and deserted waste-ground. It was not
until very late in the morning that things quietened down
and Hamza was able to rest his aching legs.
‘What happened to you?’ Khalifa asked him, gesturing
towards his hip. His eyes ran up and down Hamza’s
leg, once, then went to his face. ‘Is it illness? Or an
injury?’
‘Injury,’ Hamza said.
‘What happened?’ Khalifa repeated. ‘Were you in the
war?’ As he asked, he tilted his chin forward impatiently,
as if growing irritated with Hamza’s slowness.
‘An accident,’ Hamza said and looked away, ready to
rise to his feet and leave if Khalifa persisted. He did not
care to be interrogated.
But Khalifa laughed. ‘You’re a tight-lipped man with a
dirty secret, I have no doubt,’ he said with a grin, ‘but
I like the look of you. I can tell about people. Listen to
me, this is not a safe place for you to sleep out in the
open. You don’t know who or what wanders these
empty places at night, or what people come here to do
in the darkness. No one would come here at night to
do any good. If anything happened there would be no
one to come to your help. You should sleep inside the
warehouse and lock yourself in, but Nassor won’t let
you have the keys yet until he knows he can trust
you.’
He paused for a moment, waiting for Hamza to speak
but he said nothing. Khalifa sighed with resignation. ‘Do
you understand what I’m saying to you? It’s not safe to
sleep in the streets,’ he said. ‘I have an outside store in
my house that you can use for a few days. I used to
rent it out to a barber. He was there for two years or
so and then suddenly he left. The barber’s chair and
mirror are still in there. Poor fellow, I don’t know what
happened to him. Maybe he’ll come back for them one
of these days when he’s ready to resume his work.
‘You can use the room for a few days if you want –
but only a few days. I know you’re not much better
than a beggar so there’s no point asking for rent from
you, or not yet anyway. You can stay there for a week
or two maybe, until you work things out for yourself.
Don’t think you can just stay there forever, and I don’t
want you bringing women or crazy friends in there
either. Just somewhere for you to sleep safely. And
make sure you keep it clean, you understand?’
It made Hamza take another look at Khalifa, this
generous offer, the coin earlier in the day, all that
kindness alongside his irritable manner and sour looks. I
like the look of you, he had said. Nassor Biashara had
said that to him too. It had happened to Hamza before,
that his appearance had won kindnesses for him in
unexpected ways. The German officer had said that too,
more than once.
*
Khalifa’s house was on one level, nyumba ya chini,
without an upstairs. It was joined to a taller house on
one side and a lane ran on the other. Kibanda chetu,
he called it, our hut, although it was not that. There
was a deep covered porch at the front with the
set-back front door beside it. The porch roof was
supported by two thick varnished mangrove posts. The
store that was to be Hamza’s room was on the other
side of the porch, its door opening directly to the street.
It was a small room with a barber’s chair and mirror on
a table as promised and a wooden bench set against
one wall for the customer waiting his turn. Khalifa
opened the window, which had solid wooden shutters,
filling the little room with light. Hamza could easily
imagine the room as a barber’s shop, with a customer
or two sitting chatting while waiting, or a friend of the
barber’s visiting to fill the day’s empty hours with talk.
He thought he saw some hair mingled with the fluff of
dust on the concrete floor but perhaps that was his
imagination. Khalifa stood by the window watching him,
one hand on the bars across the casement, his frown
as censorious as ever but with a self-satisfied twitch to
the corners of his lips. ‘Does it suit Your Eminence?’ he
asked.
Khalifa handed over a key for the padlock and brought
Hamza a broom. He swept the cobwebs and the floor,
turned the mirror to the wall and rearranged the
furniture to create a sleeping space. Then he sat down
in the chair and leaned back against the shaving
headrest, joyful at his good fortune. The street outside
the door was shaded by the taller houses. Its unpaved
surface was packed hard by human traffic and while
Hamza sat there people walked past the window and
glanced sideways through the open door. He shut the
door and sat for a long time, for hours, without moving,
relishing the feeling of safety he felt in the darkening
cell.
He heard the muadhin calling for the maghrib prayers,
the calls coming slightly out of sequence. He counted
four different callers. There was always a profusion of
mosques in this town, he remembered that from years
ago. He thought he would go look for one, to have a
wash and for the company. In so many places he had
travelled there were no mosques, and he missed them,
not for the prayers but for the sense of being one of
many that he always felt in a mosque. He got up
quickly before he lost his nerve, and went in search of
one. He did not have to speak to anyone when he got
there and sat quietly with downcast eyes until it was
time to line up with the other worshippers. Then after
prayers he silently shook hands with the men to either
side of him and went on his way.
He passed shops and kiosks and cafés in the lit-up
streets, with people strolling or sitting in small groups,
talking or just looking at passers-by. They seemed at
peace and content, and he wondered if this was
because he was in a different and more prosperous
part of town, or if he was walking at a different time of
day when people were prone to be in this state, or if
they were quiescent because they were simply bored.
When he returned to the house he found Khalifa sitting
on a mat in the porch, which was now lit. He motioned
for Hamza to join him and poured him a small cup of
coffee from his flask.
‘Have you eaten?’ he asked.
He went inside and came out with a dish of cooked
green bananas and a jug of water, which Hamza
accepted gratefully. When Khalifa’s friends arrived, Hamza
greeted them and stayed for a few minutes out of
politeness before retreating to his store room. He lay in
the dark on the bare floor for a long time, unable to
sleep, his mind wandering over his earlier time in this
town and over all the people he had lost since and the
humiliations he had suffered. He had no choice but to
accept his share of them. The worst mistakes he made
in his earlier life in this town had been the result of his
fear of humiliation, through which he lost a friend who
was like a brother and the woman he was learning to
love. The war crushed those niceties out of him and
showed him staggering visions of brutality that taught
him humility. These thoughts filled him with sorrow, which
he thought was the inescapable fate of man.
*
In the next days Hamza felt Khalifa becoming less
abrupt with him and giving him advice, which he listened
to without debate. One afternoon Khalifa insisted that
Hamza should ask for an advance from the merchant.
They stopped at the yard on the way home and
Hamza found the merchant in his office and asked him
for some money from his wages while Khalifa stood
outside the door, within sight but apparently out of
earshot. Hamza could see that the merchant was not
pleased, but he was not sure if it was Khalifa’s presence
or the request for money which irritated him the most.
‘You’ve been here for three days and you’re already
asking to be paid. You get paid when you’ve done your
work, not before,’ Nassor Biashara said, holding his
ground. It was five days, but Hamza stood silently in
front of him, adding neither plea nor supplication to his
request, and in the end Nassor Biashara gave him five
shillings and returned to his ledger. ‘Don’t make a
practice of this,’ he said, head bent over his accounts.
Khalifa chuckled as they walked home. ‘What a
miserable miser, bakhili maluun! He thinks he can treat
people like dirt. He even owes money to the old lady
next door who bakes millet bread. He has her bring him
a mofa loaf every day and then he doesn’t pay her.
You should see the work that old lady does to produce
one of her little loaves. She has to soak the grain
overnight, pound it in the mortar, mix and knead it,
then bake it in a clay oven in her backyard. After all
that work, she charges twenty cents for a loaf and that
miserable tajiri waits until the old lady begs for her
money before he pays.’
They arrived at the house with Khalifa in good humour
after embarrassing the merchant, as he saw it. ‘Come in
and have something to eat,’ he said, overflowing with
generosity. ‘Hodi, we have a guest,’ he called out as he
opened the door.
It was his first time inside the house, and Hamza
wondered if this was too much hospitality too soon. It
was not usual for a complete stranger, more or less, to
be invited inside a home in this way. He was already
learning that Khalifa was unpredictable and that their first
encounter had been misleading. His outbursts of bad
temper did not last long, and he had already shown
surprising generosity to him. Hamza had hardly lived
properly among a family, only briefly as a child. Later he
lived in the back of a shop and after that for a long
time he lived a fugitive and itinerant life, so he did not
really know what was done and what was not done,
only what memory clung to from early childhood.
Inside the house there were two rooms, one either
side of the front door, and a hallway running all the
way to the back and opening out on to an interior yard
enclosed by a wall. He had seen the wall from the
other side while walking along the lane. Khalifa showed
him into the room on the left whose floor was covered
with a plaited mat and some cushions resting against
the wall. It was evidently the room for receiving guests.
He left Hamza there for a moment, and when he came
back asked him to come and greet the people of the
house. Hamza followed him to the doorway of the yard
at the back and waited there until he was called
forward. A plump woman in her forties was sitting on a
low stool under an awning, preparing food. A brazier
with a pot on it was to the left of her, and on the
other side at her feet was a clay pot covered with a
straw food-cover. Her head was covered with a kanga
which was tightly tucked around her brow and cheeks
so that her face bulged under the pressure. It had
obviously been recently tightened when Khalifa
announced the presence of a guest. Some tufts of grey
hair escaped this tight restraint. She looked at Hamza
without speaking or smiling, staring at him intensely with
a look of dislike. Khalifa introduced her as his wife Bi
Asha and Hamza said shikamoo. She looked unmoved
and made a noise to acknowledge his greeting.
‘Is this the one you were telling me about? The one
to whom you gave a room that does not belong to
you? You have brought us trouble,’ she said, her voice
firm and querulous. She glanced at Khalifa as she said
this and then returned her gaze to Hamza, her stare
unwavering. ‘Where is he from? Do we know where
he’s from? He is a complete stranger and you give him
a room as if you own this house.’
‘Don’t talk like that,’ Khalifa said impatiently.
‘Just look at him. Balaa,’ she said, even more loudly
and with unmistakable anger. ‘Nothing but trouble. You
bring him here to sleep and to eat as if we are a
charity when you don’t have a single thing to your
name. First one thing then another. Now you bring him
inside so he can have a good look at us and decide
what he would like to do to us. You don’t know his
people or where he has been or what mischief he has
done, but that’s nothing to you. You still bring him inside
here so he can do what harm he wishes to us. Your
head is full of trash!’
‘Stop that kind of talk. Don’t wish ill on a complete
stranger,’ Khalifa said.
‘I’m telling you, just look at him. Hana maana, a
useless man,’ she said, her face twisted with rage.
‘Balaa, that’s what he is. Nothing but trouble.’
‘All right, just serve us our food,’ Khalifa said, and
gave Hamza a nudge towards the inside of the house.
‘Go back inside, I’ll be with you in a moment.’
He went back to the guest room and sat down to
wait. He was shaken by such unanticipated scorn –
hana maana – but he did not examine the feeling
further. He would think about it later. For now, he only
wished for Khalifa to come back and ask him to leave.
Perhaps Bi Asha was unwell and that made her
ill-tempered, but more likely she was just a mean
unhinged spirit. He thought he saw that in her eyes, a
kind of frenzy. When Khalifa came in with two plates of
rice and fish, he too was in a temper, as if he and his
wife had had an argument. They ate quickly and in
silence. Afterwards Khalifa went out to wash his hands
and then called Hamza. Bi Asha was not there and he
washed his hands at the sink as Khalifa instructed.
When he had first looked into the yard he had noticed
a girl or woman squatting on the other side of the
awning, in a corner beside the door to a store or a
room. He guessed she was the servant, and now as he
washed his hands saw the same girl was scouring the
pots by the water-pipe in the corner. Her head was
covered and she did not look up, so he could not see
her face. He said hello to her and she replied without
looking up.
*
Khalifa and Bi Asha spoke like that to each other more
often than they used to. There had always been some
degree of hyperbole to her severity with him, making
her seem more discontented than she really was, which
gave her licence for the outrageous things she said.
That was not to say she did not mean what she said
or was not always after having her own way. She was,
and had become accustomed to her dominance in most
matters at home. Khalifa played his part as the tolerant,
put-upon husband who was prepared to go along with
things but who could put his foot down when necessary.
Their disagreements sometimes ended in an exchange of
tiny imperceptible smiles as if they had seen through
each other’s performances. But in recent times her tone
was often sharp and suspicious when she spoke to him,
and he was defensive to the point of whining when he
made his excuses, or else brusque and dismissive of
her.
Afiya did not understand why Baba brought the man
all the way inside. It was not something he had ever
done before, or not since she had been living with
them. When Ilyas came visiting he never went beyond
the guest room, and it was Bi Asha who came out to
greet him. Baba must have known that Bimkubwa would
not be happy to have a complete stranger brought
inside like that. Even the fish-seller and the charcoal
man, who were regular callers at the house, did not
step beyond the courtyard door. The only exception she
could remember was the mattress-maker who was old
and had known Bi Asha since she was a child and had
been repairing her mattresses ever since.
Baba should also have remembered that Bi Asha had
taken a dislike to the man. This was partly because of
the stories he told her about the young man: how
Hamza seemed unwell, how he did not reveal anything
about his people or where he had been.
‘He sounds like a vagabond,’ Bi Asha said dismissively.
‘I think he has been in the war,’ Baba said.
‘Then he’s probably dangerous as well, a killer,’ she
said, spitting out the words to provoke him.
‘No no,’ Baba said. ‘He must have had a hard time. It
could be Ilyas.’
‘No yourself! Ilyas had people. You tell us this one has
no people,’ Bi Asha said. ‘How can a decent person not
have any people? He’s just a dreamer.’
Perhaps Baba had not forgotten her dislike of
strangers. Maybe he brought him inside to say that Ilyas
too may have survived and could be on his long way
back. It was three years since the end of the war and
there was still no news of him. Afiya did not say it to
anyone but inside she felt her brother was lost. If Baba
brought that other man inside to remind them of Ilyas,
then he had made a mistake because it had only
provoked Bi Asha into her malign prophecy of disaster.
Balaa! She was turning strange and savage with Baba,
and Afiya knew she herself contributed to Bi Asha’s
impatience and agitation because she was nineteen and
still unmarried, though it puzzled her why this mattered
so much to her. Afiya suspected that Bi Asha had
spoken to some of her acquaintances about her
availability. She had received and refused two marriage
proposals already.
The first was from a man in his forties who was a
clerk in the offices of the new agriculture department set
up by the British administration. Afiya had never seen
him or heard of him, but he had seen her walking by
and made enquiries and then asked for her. Baba said
no, he was a man with a reputation, and what was the
rush? Afiya was present when he said that.
‘What reputation?’ Bi Asha asked querulously. ‘He has
a good government job. His proposal comes from
respectable sources and he offers a good dowry. Tell
me one good reason why I should not say yes to this
proposal.’
‘One good reason is that the proposal is not for you
but for Afiya,’ Baba said angrily. ‘So it is up to her to
accept it or not.’
‘Don’t give me your big talk. It’s not up to her. She
needs advice to make the right decision. What
reputation?’
‘I’ll tell you later,’ Baba said, and Afiya understood it
was something he preferred not to say in front of her.
Bi Asha laughed mockingly and said, ‘You want her for
yourself, don’t you? You think I’m blind. You’re going to
say no to any proposal because you’ve been waiting for
her to ripen so you can have her for your second wife.’
The words thudded in Afiya’s chest. She glanced at
Baba whose mouth had fallen open in shock. After a
moment, he said in a subdued voice, ‘His reputation is
that he has a great obsession with loose women … with
women who will take money from him for … with
prostitutes. That is his recreation. Spare our girl that
misery and just say no.’
The second proposal had come just a few weeks ago
from another older man, a café manager. Afiya knew
about him because he was well known to many. His
café was on the main street and she had passed it
several times. Unlike the first suitor who had not married
before, the café manager was fond of marrying. If Afiya
were to become his wife, she would be his sixth
although he never kept more than one going at the
same time. He was a faithful husband to whoever was
his current wife. His preference was for young orphans
or girls from poor families who would be appreciative of
the dowry he offered. He married them and kept them
for a few years and then, when another young one
caught his eye, he divorced and married again. He ran
a successful café and could afford this hobby. Bi Asha
did not need any persuasion to say no to this proposal.
‘That predator, that filthy man. We are not so
distressed that we need his disgusting dowry,’ she said.
Her accusation against Baba hovered over them, and
for Afiya it brought some of Bi Asha’s hostility into focus.
It made her feel sorry that Bi Asha feared such
treachery from her and her own husband. She could
not imagine that she had any grounds for fear. After his
wife had said those words, Baba got up and left the
house and Bi Asha and Afiya sat silent for several
minutes before Bi Asha too rose and went to her room.
She did not make the accusation again, but nor did she
stop her persistent campaign to marry her off. Afiya
wondered if that was another reason why Baba had
brought the stranger inside. She had resisted the
temptation to raise her head when he greeted her, but
had caught a brief glimpse of him when he first entered
the backyard. She knew from Baba’s stories that he
was a young man, so maybe he wanted to show her
someone nearer her own age instead of the dissolute
older suitors she appeared to be attracting.
She did not know how but word of the proposals got
out, and Jamila and Saada teased her about them.
Perhaps the matchmaker, whoever she was, let the
word out to make mischief. Jamila was married now and
carrying her first child. Khalida’s friends had a good
laugh at the rejected suitors, telling Afiya she deserved
better and should wait for the wealthy and handsome
young man who was bound to appear and ask for her.
Who wants to be someone’s second wife? When Khalida
said that, Afiya’s heart lurched and she wondered if the
accusation against Baba had also somehow got out.
There were no meaningful glances to accompany the
words and no pregnant silence after them, so she took
them to be general disdain for the idea rather than that
the words were meant against a particular person.
10
That same afternoon, after the miserable lunch in
Khalifa’s house, Hamza went to the market to spend the
five shillings given to him as an advance. He bought a
candle for his room, and a roll of thick straw matting
and a cotton sheet. He stretched out on the matting
and groaned as the familiar sharp pain ran through him.
After a few minutes its intensity eased and he let his
body find whatever rest it could. He ran his hand over
the ugly scar on his hip and massaged the healed
muscle. It will get better. It was better. There was
nothing else to be done. This town that he barely
recognised was the nearest place to home he had. The
pain will get better.
In the mornings Hamza left the house early and went
to the mosque to clean up, perform a grateful prayer
and then buy a jug of sweet tea at a café. After that
he went to the warehouse to wait for Khalifa. Almost
every day something came or went from the yard to
the warehouse, and sometimes from the warehouse to
the docks as the merchandise was gradually dispersed
to its destinations, slowly emptying the warehouse.
Almost every day, Idris and his sidekick drove up in
their rattling van to deliver or collect. It seemed that
whenever Idris opened his mouth something obscene
came out of it and his sidekick Dubu dutifully convulsed
in laughter.
It was Hamza’s duty to sweep the clearing in front of
the warehouse, and on windy days to sprinkle water on
the area to keep the dust down. Sometimes he had to
accompany the van to the yard or other locations, to
help Idris and Dubu with the loading and unloading. It
still left a lot of time for Khalifa and him to sit in the
shade of the warehouse staring out into the empty
clearing and talking. Khalifa liked to talk and Hamza was
a dutiful and tireless listener. He suspected that Khalifa
thought he was owed this deference. He never
mentioned Hamza’s encounter with Bi Asha.
‘Idris is an ugly man,’ Khalifa said. ‘He makes my flesh
shiver when he comes around. He’s a filthy cruel bully,
always talking dirty like some kind of oversexed beast.
He treats that Dubu of his like a slave. Do you know
why he is called Dubu? It’s because when he was a
child people thought he was stupid. He had such a big
head, you see, as if he was deformed. It doesn’t look
so bad now but when he was a child … Sometimes
mockery like that never ends. Idris might not have
given him the cruel name, but he makes him live up to
it. He makes fun of him and does who knows what else
to him in their spare time. He is a stupid weak man,
that Dubu.
‘And do you know what Sungura does in his spare
time? The little rabbit is a pimp, did you know that? Did
you guess? How could you not see what a little creep
he is? Of course he’s not one of those violent ones, but
one look at him and you must have thought: He is up
to something disgusting. There are two women he works
for, everyone knows it. If a man wants to have one of
them, he just has a word with Sungura who arranges it
all. That’s why he is called Sungura: small and cowardly
like a rabbit, but wily. Nobody dares to touch him
because those two women protect him as if he is their
baby. He calls them his mothers. They’re loud-mouthed
shameless women who can strip a person naked with
their tongues. Keep away from him as well, he’s a bad
influence.’
Hamza lived quietly in his store room, slipping in and
out with the minimum fuss he could manage. He was
not invited inside again although he could hear Bi Asha’s
voice, now that he knew it, whenever it rose in
exasperation or urgency. Khalifa came to look for him
sometimes in the evening and asked him to sit on the
porch with him and whoever had stopped by for a chat.
There were two men in particular who were regular
callers, his baraza, Maalim Abdalla the school teacher
and Topasi, a laundryman who lived nearby and was a
childhood friend of both men. The porch floor was
covered with a thick plaited straw mat and was lit by
an oil lamp, a kandili, suspended by a hook from a
ceiling beam. It shone with a soft golden glow that
turned the open-sided area into an interior space. People
walking past in the street murmured their greetings, as
if to call them out loudly would be to intrude. All three
men loved their gossip.
Maalim Abdalla was usually the last to speak. He was
the wise one, often offering calming words after Topasi
had delivered the latest rumours. That was why he was
called Topasi, the garbage collector, because of his love
of rumours. After Topasi had delivered the latest story,
Khalifa did his outrage about how everything has gone
to hell. Then it was Maalim Abdalla’s turn to bring
sagacity into their conversation.
Maalim Abdalla had started school in Zanzibar and then
went to the advanced German school in the town, to
train as a teacher. He knew someone who worked as a
messenger at the District Officer’s office, the
headquarters of the British colonial administration in the
town, and through him he was able to read old
newspapers after they were filed away. These were
copies of the government’s Tanganyika Territory Gazette
and the Kenya settler newspaper the East African
Standard. Maalim Abdalla’s knowledge of English was
rudimentary, plundered from his early schooling in
Zanzibar, but he made it go a long way, both in his
profession and at the baraza. His sporadic access to
what he called international publications gave his opinions
and judgements incomparable weight, at least in his own
eyes. The men’s discussions were opinionated and often
melodramatic, accompanied by much laughter and
exaggeration. Hamza was not required to participate but
they knew he was there because one or other of them
would break off what they were saying to explain a
detail to him. That was how he learned how Topasi had
earned his nickname. More often than not Hamza was
the butt of their teasing because of his reticence, but he
sat with them for the company and he knew he
provided a harmless distraction for them.
After the call to the isha prayers, to which none of the
three friends responded, the door to the house opened
slightly and Khalifa rose to accept the tray of coffee pot
and cups. Hamza did not see who delivered the tray, it
would have been bad manners to stare, but he guessed
it was the servant girl he had seen when he went
inside. He could not imagine Bi Asha, the bad-tempered
mistress of the house, doing something as menial as
delivering a tray of coffee to the chatterboxes on the
porch. The first time the tray came out there were only
three cups on it and Hamza made that the excuse for
his departure.
‘He is a little saint, that one,’ Khalifa said. ‘Off to the
mosque, I expect. Well, you won’t get there in time.’
‘I expect he’s tired of listening to your stupid talk,’ said
Maalim Abdalla. ‘Go, young man, go and earn some
blessing.’
Some evenings later when he was at the baraza and
just after the muadhin’s call for the isha prayers, the
door opened slightly as it had done before. Khalifa
glanced at him and Hamza rose to fetch the tray. He
had forgotten about his hip and could not prevent
himself from uttering a small gasp of pain as he got to
his feet. He reached out for the mangrove post to
steady himself and moved quickly towards the door
before any of the other men had moved or spoken. He
took the tray and looked at the woman who stood in
the shadow of the door, and saw surprise and perhaps
concern in her eyes. He smiled slightly to reassure her
and murmured his thanks but he was not sure if any
words came out clearly. As he turned away with the
tray, he saw that there were four cups on it. He set it
down in front of Khalifa but he did not sit down again.
‘Stay and have some coffee with your elders,’ Khalifa
said. ‘You can catch up with your prayers later.’
‘Hey, you kafir,’ Topasi said. ‘Don’t discourage a man
from saying his prayers. You are making even more
trouble for yourself. You’ll earn a bucket-load of sins for
that and you already have a huge pile against your
name.’
‘Never come between God and man,’ Maalim Abdalla
pronounced.
Hamza smiled and did not respond, did not say that it
was not for the prayers and blessing alone that he went
to the mosque. It was often a relief to get away from
their chatter, to get away from everyone. No one had
to talk even in a crowded mosque. As he walked away
he dwelt on the look of concern in the woman’s eyes
and wondered at the surprise and mild agitation it
caused him. He had seen in his brief glimpse of the
slight figure someone whose eyes and face had the
clean look of honesty. He would not know how else to
describe it, he knew that was what he saw. It made
him feel sorry for himself in a way he did not
understand, made him feel sad for the loveless years of
his own life, and for the episodes of gentleness in it that
had been so brief. He had assumed she was the
servant girl, and maybe she was, but she was a
woman of about twenty, not a girl. He wondered if,
after all, she was Khalifa’s wife. It was not unusual for
men of his age to marry again, and to choose women
who were much younger. Hamza walked the streets for
an hour or more, and in that time upbraided himself for
his naïve sentiment and nostalgia. It all came from his
loneliness and self-pity, as if he had not seen enough in
his brief life to understand that keeping his head clear
and his body safe required all the wit he possessed.
Some days later he was sent for by the merchant and
was asked to accompany Idris and Dubu to the port to
collect a consignment. Some equipment he had been
waiting for had arrived. It was Hamza’s first visit to the
docks since the morning he had arrived back in the
town. The time had passed so quickly and somehow felt
so full it was as if he had been back in the town for
months. Idris was driving the van, proud as an
aristocrat sweeping by in his gilded carriage past a
crowd of adoring serfs, one arm resting on the open
window, the other on the wheel, bouncing along the
earth roads and waving to the odd acquaintance. In the
meantime he kept up a slow-wheeling chatter that was
mostly dirty talk. Dubu, who was sitting in the middle of
the bench seat in the driver’s cab, was chuckling
dutifully while Hamza looked away, staring out of the
window. He did not feel as repulsed by them as he had
at first, although he had yet to find a way to disengage
from Idris’s filthy babble.
The equipment the merchant had ordered turned out
to be a large propeller. Idris drove right up to the gates
of one of the quayside warehouses where they found
Nassor Biashara waiting for them. He was smiling,
standing by the shiny propeller which stood on layers of
gunny sack. All the paperwork was done, he said. Let’s
get the machinery to the warehouse. They put the
propeller in the van and climbed in after it. The
merchant rode in the front cab with Idris. Nassor
Biashara was excited about his new acquisition, and he
supervised its storage personally, in a space he had had
Khalifa prepare in the middle of the warehouse,
protected and camouflaged by less glamorous
merchandise. After the equipment was stored away, he
dismissed the van and waved Hamza to follow him
outside. Khalifa looked annoyed and disappeared into the
gloom of the warehouse.
When they were outside, standing by the warehouse
door, the merchant looked around as if making sure
that they were unobserved. He reached into his jacket
and pulled out some folded-over banknotes. ‘These are
your wages for the last three weeks, and I will pay you
again three weeks from now,’ he said, his voice stern
as if expecting a truculent response. ‘I’ve paid you
generously because you have worked well. I thought
you would. From now on I want you to be the
night-watchman in the warehouse. I want you to spend
every night here and guard the valuable merchandise
inside. You will do that for the time being and then later
we’ll talk about what else you can do. You will work
here in the day as usual, and then you’ll bar yourself in
for the night. Do you understand?’
He handed over the banknotes, which Hamza accepted
without a word and pocketed without counting them.
The merchant smiled and nodded, no doubt amused by
the pauper standing on his dignity, Hamza thought.
Nassor Biashara took his cap off, rubbed his head in
that characteristic gesture of his and then strode away.
Hamza expected Khalifa to come striding out at once to
complain about being excluded from these instructions
but perhaps he was even more wounded than he had
appeared. Hamza sat down on the bench by the door
to wait for him and after a minute or two he called to
him. When Khalifa came out Hamza held up the notes.
Khalifa reached over as if to grab them and Hamza put
them back in his pocket. ‘I’m to be the night-watchman
from tonight, and to work in the warehouse during the
day,’ he said.
‘He is a stupid man,’ Khalifa said. ‘How much is he
paying you?’
‘I don’t know,’ Hamza said. ‘I didn’t count.’
‘You are a stupid man too, but I feel sorry for you
because you do it from some confused idea of being
well mannered or dignified. I know the type, believe me,’
Khalifa said. ‘But that one is just a silly man who has
never properly grown up. Why is he getting so excited
about this propeller? He thinks every boatman and
fisherman in the town is waiting to steal it from him.
That’s his new project. He spent thousands buying a
boat a couple of years ago. It was going to make him
money freighting cargo in the area. It didn’t, and now
he has spent thousands more buying a propeller
because that will make him money, which it may well
do, but in the meantime he acts like an idiot and he
puts you in danger. You must bar yourself in after dark
and don’t open the door to anyone. There are drunks
and hashish smokers who come to sleep in these
abandoned old places. Do you understand? Whatever
you hear outside, don’t open the door. Let them do
whatever they are doing to each other and stay inside.’
Khalifa seemed so worried for his safety that Hamza
stopped himself from saying that he had seen much
worse than drunks and hashish smokers in his time,
instead nodding and saying he would take care. That
afternoon he collected his things from Khalifa’s store
room, stopped at the café for a small loaf of bread and
a piece of fish, and returned to the warehouse. In the
night he heard cats scurrying over the roof and yowling
in the lanes, and just before he fell asleep he heard
someone singing drunkenly and then sobbing, calling out
a name as if in an agony of yearning. He woke up in
the dark and lay thinking, waiting for the dawn.
Early every evening before it got dark, he made a
bed out of layers of gunny sacks on top of which he
laid his straw mattress, his strip of busati. The spring
and give in the sacks absorbed some of the ache in his
side, except when he turned over in his sleep. Then he
went to the café for something to eat, goat curry or
fish or sometimes just buttered bread. Afterwards he
went to the mosque to wash up and pray and then
back to the warehouse, by which time it was properly
dark. He lit the oil lamp he had asked the merchant to
provide, barred himself in and lay down to sleep. When
he could not sleep he took out one of his books from
the bag and browsed through it. The lamplight was a
little too gloomy for him to read the old print of the
Schiller volume comfortably and he could only go over
the pieces he already knew. He took the book out as
much for the pleasure of handling it as for what he
could read.
Then he lay in that golden lamplight and tried to ignore
the tiny scurryings of mice he could not help hearing
among the sacks and crates. At times he felt like a
man of primeval times when the end of daylight meant
a retreat to a burrow in the ground, a caveman hiding
from the terrors of the night. He kept the lamp lit all
night to keep those terrors at bay but he had no
defence against the whispers that crept up on him on
sleepless nights. Many nights he fell asleep without a
struggle but on others he saw torn and mutilated bodies
in his dreams and was hectored by loud and hate-filled
voices and glared at by transparent gelatinous eyes. As
the nights in the warehouse turned into weeks he slept
for longer, even in the end until first light. Every
morning he woke with surprise that he had slept so
long and counted the hours of undisturbed sleep like a
miser shopkeeper counting the pennies as they
accumulated in his cash box. He was grateful for the
benefit of the rest.
*
It took nearly a month for the mechanic who fitted
propellers to get round to Nassor Biashara’s dhow. The
work was to be done on the sandy headland at the
edge of the creek behind the port where boat repairs
were usually done. The tide in the creek went out all
the way to the sea, and then came surging back in late
in the day. It only reached the sandy headland when it
was a full moon. The mechanic’s appearance was
announced and then postponed four times. Several days
before his actual appearance, the boat was pulled up on
the headland at low tide. The crew laid lengths of
mangrove logs on the beach and waited for the tide to
rise when all available labour, including the merchant’s
workforce and any interested passer-by, joined in to
haul the boat on to the rollers and as high as they
could up on the sandy headland. There it was tied to
sturdy posts to prevent it from rolling back and there it
stayed while the mechanic delayed further. Khalifa played
no part in these efforts, only asking sarcastic questions
about the elusive mechanic. The merchant paid no
attention to the progress of his enterprise either, not
even bothering to be exasperated by the man’s
continued non-appearance, as if none of it was anything
to do with him. Hamza found the merchant’s behaviour
puzzling, but then thought that perhaps it was his way
of maintaining his dignity, refusing the mechanic the
satisfaction of being indispensable. The boat waited like
that for several days, like a beetle stranded on its back.
On the day the mechanic was available, the van came
to collect the propeller and Hamza who was to go along
and help. Even Khalifa could not resist the drama of the
mechanic’s definite appearance to fix the propeller and
he too came along to observe the final rites.
Unlike the merchant, the nahodha of the boat was not
concerned to maintain his dignity, and on the day the
mechanic was finally available, the two of them spent
the first hour hurling denunciations and abuse at each
other while Dubu and Hamza sat in the meagre shade
of the boat, and Idris and Khalifa remained in the cab
of the van. The nahodha, who was a short, grizzled
man in his fifties, with skin darkened and tanned into
tough leather by the sun and sea, told the mechanic he
was an ignorant idiot and a disrespectful fuckhead for
wasting everyone’s time. The mechanic, who was about
thirty or so with a trimmed beard and a peaked cap,
and who arrived on a motorcycle and knew his own
importance, told the nahodha to watch how he spoke to
him because he was not one of the pretty boys he
liked to play with. He had his own business to attend to
and if the nahodha did not like that he could go find
himself another mechanic. Since there was no certainty
that another would turn up any more quickly, this threat
was a potent one. After a while, the bile diminished and
they proceeded to install the propeller while continuing
their abuse more sporadically. When the tide was in,
they hauled the boat back into the water where the
mechanic finished the installation. Idris drove the van
back to the yard to fetch the merchant so he could be
present when the mechanic fired the propeller, which he
did to cheers and exclamations. By this time the
nahodha and the mechanic were talking and laughing
together in self-congratulation as if they had known each
other all their lives, which they very likely had.
Even as they celebrated the installation of the precious
propeller, the merchant’s smiles were anxious, perhaps
for the future of his new venture. He called Hamza over
and as they stood on the sandy headland by the creek,
he told him that since the propeller was now safely
installed, there was no need for him to be a watchman
at the warehouse and he could get his things and go
back to his home. Tomorrow morning he should come
and see the merchant with the warehouse keys so he
could be paid off, and then maybe there might be
something else for him to do but the merchant was not
promising anything.
Hamza had not expected to be dispensed with so
promptly. He was sorry that his warehouse duties were
over. It had been a mostly peaceful time despite the
lonely and anguished moods that sometimes overcame
him: working in the warehouse during the day, talking
with Khalifa or rather listening to him when he felt like
talking, then sleeping quietly at night in the golden glow
of the oil lamp and in the must and strange heat of all
the merchandise … it had given him time to rest and
think and bring a little calm to his life. It had also made
him live again through many regrets and sorrows, but
those were with him in any case and were perhaps
never to be reconciled.
The next day he told Khalifa that he was no longer
the watchman. ‘He has asked me to return the keys to
him this morning. I think he was telling me there was
no more work but I’m not sure.’
‘He is a weasel, a conniving and deceitful little
opportunist,’ Khalifa said, delighting in the merchant’s
meanness. ‘I expect you thought he’d give you a
uniform and make you a proper security guard and
build you a bathroom annexe so you could do your
ablutions and say your prayers in the warehouse. You’re
an idiot to trust that man.’ Then after a moment he
growled softly and said ‘Well, you’d better come back to
your store room then. Maybe another job will turn up.’
Hamza found Nassor Biashara in the furniture
workshop. He was talking to the man Hamza had seen
embroidering his cap several weeks ago in the timber
workshop. He had been to the workshop a few times
while on errands to the yard, when he had looked in to
see what was going on and just for the pleasure of the
smell of wood. He now knew that the old man’s name
was Sulemani and that he was the master carpenter in
the workshop. Everyone called him Mzee Sulemani
although he was probably only in his fifties. There was a
younger man who worked for him, the one with the
slicked-back black ponytail he was vain about and which
he stroked frequently, but he was not there this
morning. His name was Mehdi and he usually smelled of
stale alcohol as if he had woken up after a night of
drinking and had come to work without so much as
rinsing his mouth. Sometimes he pressed his fingers to
his temples as if his head was hurting, and Hamza
thought that doing the work he did with a hangover
would be a nightmare, banging and hammering and
sawing. He remembered how the officer’s hangovers
had tormented him after the heavy-drinking sessions the
Germans had indulged in. There was also a teenaged
boy called Sefu in the workshop who did jobs like
sanding and varnishing and who cleaned up at the end
of the day. His younger brother came to help
sometimes, just for something to do and perhaps to
show willing in case a job came up in the future. They
were the two Hamza had seen carrying a pot of varnish
on his first day in the yard. Nassor Biashara himself also
worked in the workshop at times. He designed all the
furniture in his office but he often put the finishing
touches to the small ornamental items himself.
When Hamza found them in the workshop, Mzee
Sulemani was listening to the merchant with a small
frown on his face when normally his brow was unlined
and his expression was deadpan and aloof. The
merchant finished talking to him then turned towards
Hamza and held out his hand for the keys. Come with
me, he said and walked away without waiting. Hamza
glanced at the carpenter who looked back
expressionless.
When he caught up with Nassor Biashara in his tiny
office next door to the workshop, the merchant said, as
if the thought had just occurred to him when it was
clear to Hamza that he had been waiting to do so all
along: ‘You’d like to work with wood, wouldn’t you? I’ve
seen you going in there from time to time. I can always
tell people who like wood. I’ve seen you sniffing the
timber – always a giveaway. Anyway, you’ve finished
there in the warehouse. I was just helping you out
because I liked the look of you and you needed work,
but you did well. How you managed to cope with that
old grumbler Khalifa I don’t know, but it seems he has
taken quite a liking to you, which is not a habit of his.
Now how would you like to work in the workshop? You
can help Mzee Sulemani and he will teach you things.
He is a very good carpenter. He doesn’t say much but
he’s dependable, and you can learn a lot from him,
even become a carpenter. Vipi, what do you say?’
The offer was so unexpected that for a moment
Hamza could only grin with surprise. The merchant
smiled back and nodded. ‘It suits you much better when
you smile like that,’ he said. ‘So it seems the idea
appeals to you. Mehdi will not come back now. He has
lost himself completely … all this drinking, staggering
around the streets picking fights and then going home
to beat his wife and his sister. I wouldn’t have kept him
here this long but his father was a friend of my father’s
so I had no choice but to keep him for their sake. This
time it seems he picked one brawl too many and
someone threatened to cut him with a knife. His mother
has now begged him to go to Dar es Salaam to some
relatives there, as if that will save him from himself.
Anyway, I don’t know what you’re waiting for, go to the
workshop and get started.’
Mzee Sulemani gave Hamza simple jobs at first, asking
him to move the pieces of furniture to another part of
the workshop, to hold one end of a plank while he
planed or drilled, and in the meantime he watched him
and instructed him. Hamza did as he was asked and
apologised for the smallest mistake. The carpenter
named more woods for him: mkangazi, mahogany,
mvinje, cypress, mzaituni, olive. He made him smell the
wood and stroke the planks so he would know them
again. Hamza asked questions and allowed his
enthusiasm to show, and within a few days he knew
that the old man was less suspicious of him than he
had been at the start. At the end of the day’s work
Mzee Sulemani put all the tools away in a trunk himself,
then padlocked it and pocketed the key. He shut all the
windows and explained how he wanted the workshop
left. When he called Hamza by name as he locked up
at the end of the day and said, Hamza, tomorrow
inshaallah, it felt like a kind of welcome: come again
tomorrow. They always stopped for lunch so Mzee
Sulemani could work on his embroidery although he did
not eat anything. The thought of his new occupation of
carpentry filled Hamza with more enthusiasm than he
could remember for any other work he had done.
He told Khalifa about his new job in such excitement
that he laughed and repeated the story to his baraza
friends who teased the young man and called him fundi
seramala. He installed himself in the store room in
Khalifa’s house as before and resumed his old routine:
washing himself in the mosque, eating his evening meal
at a café and on some evenings sitting on the porch
with Khalifa and his friends while they mulled over the
state of the world. That only lasted for a few days,
though. One morning he was called to the door of the
house by Bi Asha who sent him on an errand to the
café. The young boy who usually brought their
early-morning loaf of bread and buns had not come so
she asked Hamza to go to the café for her. It was the
first time she had spoken to him since her outburst in
the yard but she acted as if nothing like that had
happened between them. Take this money and fetch the
bread and buns from the café – off you go. That
became his job every morning. He knocked on the door
and the younger woman gave him the money for the
café and a basket for the bread and buns. When he
came back he knocked on the door again and handed
the basket over. In return he was given a slice of
bread and a mug of tea for his breakfast. The woman
called out his name and he went to the door to collect
it. He did not think of her as the servant woman any
more. She told him her name was Afiya.
He was sent on other errands: to take a parcel or a
basket of food or a message to neighbours or relatives.
Sometimes Bi Asha called him and lent his services to a
neighbour who needed a hand with something. She was
often angry with the same neighbours behind their
backs, recounting their endless slights of her and their
repeated blasphemies. She was surrounded by
blasphemers, so it seemed, and she recited scraps of
the Koran as she lent Hamza to them, to provide him
with some protection he hoped. She sent him on these
errands in her habitual abrupt way as if she had every
right to make these demands on him. Khalifa would not
take rent for the room, which made Hamza a
dependant of the household and under an obligation to
them. He found this comforting, as if he belonged, and
he did not mind being summoned back and forth. He
even became used to Bi Asha’s sharpness, which
showed no sign of softening. It was still an improvement
to be obliged to be useful rather than to be greeted as
an impending disaster: Balaa. Hana maana.
*
‘Mzee Sulemani is pleased with your work,’ Nassor
Biashara said. ‘I just knew it. I knew you would be
good at this. He says you have manners, which is a big
word for him. It doesn’t just mean politeness, it means
much more than that to him.’
Nassor Biashara paused and waited. Hamza felt that
he was being tested but he was not sure in what way.
He waited for the merchant to explain. Nassor Biashara
said, ‘It’s not that he has talked to me about this but
it’s what I think. I’ve known him for a long time. He
never uses strong language. I don’t mean bad cursing
language, he does not even use the name of God the
way everyone else does, wallahi and so on when we
want to say we mean something. He will shush you if
you say wallahi, as if you are cheapening God’s name.
The worst thing he can say about someone is, I don’t
believe him. He puts great faith in the truth, though that
sounds more pompous than I meant it to. Perhaps it
would be better to say he has faith in frankness,
openness, something like that, without noise or show …
you’re like that too. And courteous – he likes that. That
is what he meant when he said you have manners. He
won’t say any of this to you himself so I’m telling you.’
Hamza did not know what to say. He was moved by
being so well thought of and by the merchant’s kindness
in telling him. He felt his eyes smarting with emotion.
Sometimes it troubled him that Khalifa found the
merchant so abhorrent. He did not seem so bad to
Hamza.
‘He tells me you’re living in Khalifa’s house,’ Nassor
Biashara said, bustling with his books, his tone less
confiding, less approving. ‘You didn’t tell me that. You’re
settling down nicely then. Mind you, I am not sure I
would want to live with that old grumbler.’
‘I don’t live in his house exactly,’ Hamza said. ‘They let
me use an outside room that used to be a barber’s
shop.’
‘I know the house very well, and it’s not really his. Or
hers. How do you find Bi Asha? A bit gruff, hey? I
don’t know which of them turned the other the most
sour but I expect it was largely her to blame. She is a
woman full of grievances. You won’t go and tittle-tattle
about this, will you? We’re related, you know. Well, I’m
related to the household,’ the merchant said, and then
waved away any further conversation on the subject as
he settled down to his paperwork.
‘I hear you’re related to Nassor Biashara,’ Hamza said
later to Khalifa. ‘Or rather, he said he was related to
the household.’
Khalifa considered this for a moment and then said, ‘Is
that what he said? That he is related to the household?’
‘Why does he say household?’ Hamza asked. ‘Does
that mean Bi Asha?’
Khalifa nodded. ‘He is a weasel man, I told you that.
He is a devious double-speaker who likes that kind of
old-fashioned flourish talk. People like him think it’s bad
manners to talk about the women of the house.’
Hamza sensed that Khalifa was hesitating over saying
something else so he poured him another coffee – they
were sitting out on the porch that evening on their own
– and asked: ‘How are you related?’
Khalifa took his time, had a sip and gathered his
thoughts while Hamza waited, knowing that he would get
the story in due course. ‘I told you I worked for his
father, Amur Biashara the pirate merchant. I worked for
him for many years. It was during that time that Bi
Asha and I were married. Bwana Amur was a relative
of hers and he … arranged … well, he brought us
together.’
‘How did you end up working for him?’ Hamza asked
after a long pause when Khalifa remained unusually
reticent. He did not often need prompting.
Khalifa said ‘Do you really want to hear all this old
stuff? You don’t tell me anything about yourself and
then you ask me and I can’t resist. That’s the curse of
getting old. I can’t keep my mouth shut.’
‘I really want to hear about the old pirate,’ Hamza
said, grinning because he knew Khalifa was not going to
be able to resist telling him.
*
It had been in the early stages of the kusi, the summer
monsoons, when Hamza arrived in the town on that
swiftly darkening evening. By then the traders from
across the ocean had made their way home to Somalia
and South Arabia and Western India. He did not
remember much about the weather from his time in the
town many years before, and many of the years after
he left were arduous and spent far in the interior a long
way from coastal winds. Everyone told him that these
months in the middle of the year were the sweetest but
he did not really understand that when he first returned.
The land was still green from the long rains and the
winds were mild. Later in the year, in the last third or
so, it became drier and hotter, and then with the
beginning of the winter monsoons, the kaskazi, came
rough seas and high winds at first and then the short
rains, and finally in the new year the steady winds from
the north-east.
That wind brought the traders’ ships back from across
the ocean. Their true destination was Mombasa or
Zanzibar, prosperous towns with rich merchants ready to
trade, but some of them straggled into other port
towns, including theirs. The arrival of the ships was
anticipated weeks in advance, and popular legends of
captains and crew were revived and circulated once
again: the chaos they brought as they sprawled over
any empty space and turned it into a campsite, the
fabulous merchandise they hawked through the streets,
a lot of it trinkety but some of it valuable beyond the
vendors’ awareness, the thick rugs and rare perfumes,
the shiploads of dates and salted kingfish and dried
shark that they sold as job lots to the merchants, their
notorious hunger for fruit and for mangoes in particular,
and their unruly violence, which in the past had led to
open battles in the streets and forced people to lock
themselves in their houses in terror. The sailors filled the
mosques to overflowing, and perfumed the air with their
sea-salted, sweat-stained kanzus and kofias, which were
often tarnished brown with grime. The area around the
port bore the brunt of their excesses. The timber yard
and Khalifa’s house were some distance into the town,
and the only travellers who came their way were the
street hawkers with their baskets of gum and spices
and perfume and necklaces and brass trinkets and
thick-woven cloths dyed and embroidered in medieval
colours. Sometimes high-stepping Suri merchants who
had lost their way came marching through the
neighbourhood, swinging their canes high as if they were
crossing enemy territory. Children trooped behind them,
calling out mocking words the strangers did not
understand and making farting noises with their mouths,
which the Suri were reputed to find especially insulting.
If the timber yard and Khalifa’s house were a little out
of the way for the traders and sailors, the open ground
in front of the warehouses was not. They congregated
there every day, and some of them camped there
during the night. Sellers of fruit and grilled maize and
cassava and coffee followed them there and transformed
the area to something like the buzzing tumultuous
marketplace Khalifa had so longingly described to Hamza
so many months before. The warehouse had been
emptied of its merchandise over the past months and
weeks and was now empty and ready to receive new
supplies. Nassor Biashara shifted his office from the
cubbyhole in the timber yard for the morning and set
up another small desk just inside the warehouse doors.
In the afternoon he returned to the yard to put his
paperwork in order, leaving Khalifa to take charge of the
delivery and stowing of the merchandise. It was a hectic
time for him and he often had to work late, bustling
around self-importantly with his clipboard, keeping track
of the new stock. Hamza thought he was back in his
element, as clerk to a pirate merchant, despatching Idris
and Dubu back and forth to the port and supervising
the porters who had been hired to stack the
merchandise.
This was quite unlike his normal working day. Usually
Khalifa locked the warehouse in the early afternoon,
dropped off the keys at the timber yard and went
home. If his work was light in the workshop, Hamza
went with him to have lunch, which he ate in his room
or on the porch. Mzee Sulemani stayed in the workshop
and did not eat lunch. Hamza returned after lunch until
the muadhin called the afternoon prayers when they
swept the workshop and locked up. If he did not go
back to the house for lunch, his portion was kept aside
and he had it later on when he went home. In this
way, he had become part of the household while
remaining outside it in his store room. He did not go
inside the house again after that first time, and when Bi
Asha summoned him from the interior courtyard to run
an errand as she sometimes did, her voice easily
carrying to him and beyond, he waited by the outside
door. When she snapped irritably at him and told him to
come in, he stepped just inside the doorway and waited
there until she came to him. He tried to maintain a line
between being a servant, which he did not wish to be,
and a dependant who had obligations to the household
but who made no presumptions.
One day, during Khalifa’s prolonged absence at the
warehouse, Hamza knocked on the door for his lunch
as was his practice and Afiya opened it. She passed
him a mug of water and a dish of rice and spinach.
When she did not shut the door immediately as she
usually did, he sat down on the porch by the door and
started to eat. He felt her presence in the shadows just
inside the door. He had been living in the store room
for several months by then and had not exchanged
more than a few necessary words with her, although he
often thought of her. After eating a few mouthfuls,
sensing her nearby all the time, he said softly so that Bi
Asha inside the house would not hear, ‘Who gave you
that name? Your father or your mother?’
‘Afiya? It means good health,’ she said. ‘My mother
gave it to me.’
He expected her to shut the door then but she did
not. She stayed because she wanted to speak to him
too. It had become so that he thought about her often,
especially while he was alone in his room. Sometimes
when she walked past and his window was open she
would call out a greeting without looking in and then he
would hurry to catch a glimpse of her as she walked
away down the lane. Sometimes she walked past
without greeting him and he caught sight of her and
was stirred nonetheless. Whenever he was called to the
door or when he saw her in passing, he spoke the few
words it was possible for him to use without causing her
offence just so that he could hear her voice, which was
throaty and rich in a way he found moving.
‘She called you that to wish you good health,’ he said,
prompting her when she did not say any more.
‘Yes, and herself perhaps. She was not well,’ Afiya
said. ‘That’s what I was told. She passed on when I
was very small, maybe two years old, I’m not sure. I
don’t remember her.’
‘And your father, is he well?’ asked Hamza, not
knowing if he should, not sure if he should stop.
‘He passed on many years ago. I didn’t know him.’
He muttered condolences and addressed his bowl of
rice. He wanted to tell her that he had lost his parents
too, that he was taken away from them and did not
know where they were and they no longer knew where
he was. He wanted to ask what happened to that
father she did not know. Did he pass on while she was
a baby as her mother did or did he just leave her to
her fate after her mother’s death? He did not ask
because it was only to satisfy his curiosity, and he did
not know what sorrows he might release with his
question.
‘Does your leg hurt? I have seen you wince in pain
before and I noticed that again as you sat down just
now,’ she said.
‘It hurts, but it’s getting better every day,’ he said.
‘What happened to you?’ she asked.
He chuckled, made a brief snorting noise, trying to
keep his answer light. ‘I’ll tell you one day.’
After a moment he heard her moving away and was
sorry that he had not given her something in return for
what she had given him. She came back a short while
later to collect his empty bowl and to bring him
segments of an orange on a small plate. ‘You can come
inside to wash your hands when you’ve finished,’ she
said.
When he finished he called out and went inside. He
waited for her to appear at the courtyard doorway
before offering her the empty plate and following behind
her. She pointed to the sink against the left-hand wall of
the courtyard and he went there to wash his hands.
There was no sign of Bi Asha. He had guessed she
was absent from the way Afiya felt free to talk to him
and to invite him inside. He washed his hands at the
sink and then looked around in open curiosity whereas
before he had hurried to get away from Bi Asha’s
tetchy welcome. On the same side as the sink was the
tap in the corner where he had seen Afiya washing the
dishes that first time. Now he saw that the washroom
was over on the back wall of the yard next to the
awning and that two rooms ran along the right-hand
side. He had taken one of them to be a store, in front
of which stood two seredani braziers, one of which was
charged with charcoal ready to be lit. The other was
more substantial than he remembered it and had gauze
netting and a curtain across its open window. Its door
was shut. If that was her room then it was decent
enough compared to customary practice. Servants
sometimes only had a mat and a corner of a hallway, if
anything at all. Perhaps she was not a servant and was
after all Khalifa’s second wife as he had at first
assumed.
She followed the direction of his gaze and nodded
slightly. Her kanga had slipped to the back of her head
and snagged on a hairpin or a brooch there, and he
saw more of her than he had seen before at such
close quarters. Her hair was parted in the middle and
pulled back into two braids joined together at the back.
She held her kanga loosely so that he saw something
of her upper body and her waist. After a moment she
pulled her kanga together and adjusted it on her head.
It was a familiar gesture of modesty but he wondered if
she had relaxed the covering for a moment for his
benefit. They exchanged smiles as he thanked her and
left, but he thought she knew how he felt about her. It
excited him. If she knew how he felt and smiled back at
him in that way, then she could not be Khalifa’s wife.
That she sat with him and then invited him in to wash
his hands when Bi Asha was not there, meant she was
entering into a small deception. By his reckoning, which
was not extensive in such matters, the situation had all
the makings of a courtship and Hamza returned to the
workshop in a mood of small elation.
There was an undertow to his joy however. He had
little to offer her: a job that was not secure, a home
that was a room granted in patronage and which could
just as easily be withdrawn if his attentions offended, a
bed that was a busati on the floor. His body was
damaged and abused. He brought neither past joy nor
future promise, just a sorry tale of abjection to add to
hers when she might have looked forward to some relief
from her own. There was still a chance that she was
someone else’s wife and he was about to become
entangled in dangerous and indecorous matters. There
was no talking himself out of his excitement, though,
even as he also feared he did not have the will to fulfil
his desire. He might in any case have completely
misread the events that had just occurred. So much
had been knocked out of him that at times he was
paralysed by a sense of futility about anything he might
wish to undertake. It was a sense he resisted daily and
which the workshop and his work with wood, and the
daily benign company of the carpenter, somehow helped
to dissipate.
That afternoon Mzee Sulemani was in a quietly joyful
mood too, humming his favourite qasidas as he worked.
Perhaps he had received news that cheered him or had
just completed the embroidery of his latest kofia. It
added to Hamza’s own sense of elation and he could
not suppress his smiles, so much so that the carpenter
noticed the difference in him and looked at him
wonderingly without saying a word. On one occasion
Hamza dropped his drill absent-mindedly and later mislaid
a square, looking around irritably for it when it was right
before his eyes. These were mistakes he did not usually
make. On another occasion Mzee Sulemani caught
Hamza’s eye as he was smiling to himself and raised his
eyebrows as if to ask what was pleasing him. Hamza
laughed at himself for his light-headedness. After his
usual fashion, the carpenter did not say anything but
Hamza saw that he too was suppressing a smile. Had
the old man guessed his secret? Were these things
always so obvious?
‘Leuchtturm Sicherheitszündhölzer.’ Hamza found the
box of matches tucked away in one of the drawers in
the workshop and read the brand name out loud. Mzee
Sulemani looked up enquiringly from his sanding,
‘What did you say?’ he asked.
Hamza repeated the words, Leuchtturm
Sicherheitszündhölzer. Lighthouse Safety Matches. The old
carpenter moved over to where Hamza stood and took
the matches from him. He looked at the box for a
moment and then handed it back. He walked to a shelf
and took down a tin which they used for nails that
needed straightening. He brought that over to Hamza
who read, ‘Wagener-Weber Kindermehl.’
‘You can read,’ the carpenter said.
‘Yes, and write,’ Hamza said. He could not keep the
pride out of his voice.
‘In German,’ the carpenter said. Then pointing to the
tin, he asked, ‘What does that say?
‘Wagener-Weber Baby-milk.’
‘Can you also speak German?’
‘Yes.’
‘Mashaalah,’ Mzee Sulemani said.
11
It had become so that she thought of him all the time.
When he came to the house in the morning for the
bread money, she restrained herself from speaking to
him in case Bi Asha heard her. In her book of sins
speaking to a man was equivalent to making an
arrangement for a secret meeting with him. Hamza said,
Habari za asubuhi and she said, Nzuri, and handed over
the basket and the money instead of touching him or
pressing herself against him. When she passed his room
and could see the window was open, she had to resist
the temptation to lean in and talk for a moment or hold
out her hand to him. Sometimes she called out a
greeting but dared not stop. She felt a small leap of
elation every time he knocked on the door, and felt the
beginnings of a smile on her lips, which she suppressed
in case she seemed eager and flurried when she
opened the door. She longed for the brief moments she
saw him. She no longer called him for his slice of bread
and cup of tea. It’s like you are the owner’s dog, she
said to him one morning. She now knocked on his door
and brought breakfast on a tray to him. He was always
ready, waiting for her with a smile. One morning, as she
was about to hand the money over for the breakfast
bread and buns, she touched his hand, it seemed
accidental but of course it was not, and just to make
sure she held it for a brief second more. Not even an
idiot could misunderstand that.
‘Your leg is improving, isn’t it?’ she said. ‘I can see
from the way you move.’
‘It’s getting better,’ he said. ‘Thank you.’
The moment was coming when what needed to be
said would be said but she was not sure if she should
press matters forward or wait for him to act. She did
not want him to think she knew how to do such things,
for him to think that she had done such things before.
She wished she could confide in Jamila and Saada, and
many times the words were on the tip of her tongue
but something held her back. She wondered if it was
from fear that they would mock him and tell her to
come to her senses and not act in such a
self-disregarding way with a man whose people she did
not know. Perhaps they would think him a penniless
wanderer, not that she was anything more than that
herself. She was a woman, they would say, and in the
end all a woman had was her honour and was she
sure he deserved the risk? She did not dare mention
him to Khalida either, because she would only tell her
friends who would howl with laughter and encourage
Afiya to audacities she was not really up to. Anyway,
what was the rush? She did not feel impatient and even
liked the tense anticipation of fulfilment.
At other times she was afraid she would lose him, and
he would move on as he had come, heading nowhere
in particular but away from her. She had understood
that much about him, from looking and listening, that he
was a man who was dangling, uprooted, likely to come
loose. Or at least that was what she guessed from what
she saw, that he was too diffident to make the decisive
move, that one day she would wait for him to come to
the door for the bread money and he would not appear
and would be gone from her life for ever. It was a fear
that filled her with dejection, and at those moments she
was determined to give him a sign. Then the moment
would pass and she would be back with her own
caution and uncertainty.
She thought about him so much that she was at times
distracted in company. Jamila noticed and laughingly
asked who she was thinking about. Had somebody
asked for her? Afiya laughed too and moved the subject
on and did not tell her what had happened recently at
home. Just the day before Jamila caught her out in her
reverie, Bi Asha had come back from one of her
afternoon visits and said to her, smiling with
unaccustomed archness, ‘I think we are going to have
some good news for you soon.’
It could only mean that a proposal was on the way.
That was another fear. It had been several months
since the two rejected ones, and Bi Asha had begun to
murmur that they may have been too hasty and would
now have acquired a reputation for arrogance in their
expectations. Bi Asha’s smile of relief and pleasure filled
Afiya with dread. She did not ask any questions about
who the suitor might be or who had made the enquiry
for him. Bi Asha gave her an appraising look and came
to her own conclusions, but these were probably not
any cause for anxiety because the smile remained on
her face. When Jamila had asked her the question,
Afiya’s mind was fixed on the ways she might let
Hamza know how she felt. Should she write him a
note? Should she lean into his window and say I can’t
stop thinking about you? What if he did not return her
feelings? It was agony, made so much worse for her
because she had time on her hands and could not
speak about him to anyone.
*
Hamza also had troubles on his mind. On many
occasions he walked the shore road in the direction of
the house where he once lived. He was there for
several years, from when he was no more than a child
taken away from his first home to when he ran away
to join the schutztruppe. He spent many of those years
penned in the shop of the merchant who owned him,
except for the several months he went with him on a
long and arduous journey to the interior, walking with
the porters and the guards for weeks on end across
country that astonished and terrified him at the same
time. The merchant was in the caravan trade, and
Hamza knew later that the Germans wanted this trade
to end, and wanted to be in charge of everything from
the coast to the mountains. They had had enough of
the resistance of coastal traders and their caravans and
had dealt sternly with them in the al Bushiri wars, when
it became necessary to demonstrate to the bearded
rice-eating slave raiders that their time was up and
German order had taken over. At the time Hamza did
not fully understand much of this, even as he travelled
in the interior and heard of the approach of German
power. What he understood was his own bondage and
powerlessness, and really he hardly understood that, but
he felt how it crushed his spirit and turned him into a
ghost.
In the time he lived in the merchant’s shop, he hardly
ever visited the town. From first light to late evening, he
and another older boy stood in the shop and served
the stream of customers. After dark, they closed up the
premises and slept in the back. He was troubled that he
could not find the house again. The shop had faced the
road and there had been a walled garden along one
side of the house and a stand-pipe where they had
made their ablutions. There was no sign of the place
now, and where he thought it used to stand was a
grand-looking house painted a soft cream colour. It had
an upstairs floor, a latticed veranda running all along its
front and a low wall enclosing a gravelled front yard. He
walked past the house several times but even after
repeated visits had yet to find the courage to knock on
the door and ask what had happened to the old place
that once stood there. Here, many years ago, he would
tell whoever opened the door, I saw my cowardice and
timidity glistening like vomit on the ground. Here I saw
how humility and diffidence was turned into humiliation.
He did not knock and he did not say any of that,
instead he circled round and headed back to the town.
There were parts of the town where he was no longer
a stranger, and in the late afternoons and early
evenings he walked these familiar areas. Sometimes he
sat in a café and had a snack, or lingered on the
fringes of a conversation or a card game. People
greeted him or smiled at him or even exchanged a few
words without asking him any questions or offering any
information about themselves. From overheard
conversations he could put names to some people and
even learned brief histories of them, although those
could well be exaggerations prompted by the café
ambience.
Tucked away down one street he saw a group of
people sitting on a bench opposite the open door of a
house where a small group of musicians were
rehearsing and a woman was singing. He stopped there
for a while and stood in the street in the bright light of
the hissing pressure lamp, which illuminated the rehearsal
room and the group of people sitting and standing
outside. The woman’s song was full of yearning for her
lover to whom she cited example after example of her
devotion. The words and the voice filled him with
longing, with grief and with elation at the same time.
During a break in the music he asked the youth
standing beside him what was happening.
‘Are they rehearsing for a concert?’
The teenager looked surprised and then shrugged. ‘I
don’t know,’ he said. ‘They play here and we come to
listen. Maybe they play at concerts as well.’
‘Do they play often?’
‘Nearly every night,’ the youth said.
Hamza knew he would come again.
*
Mzee Sulemani’s goodwill increased after he learned that
not only could Hamza read but he could read in
German. He delighted in giving Hamza a sentence and
asking for a German translation. He was happy to join
in Mzee Sulemani’s game, a small repayment for the gift
of the carpentry skills he was learning from him.
Lead us on the road that is straight, make us
steadfast without doubt or scepticism, without shadow or
regret. How do you say that in German?’ the old
carpenter asked, a look of happy anticipation on his
face.
Hamza did the best he could but there were times he
had to admit defeat, especially with the more mystical or
devotional pronouncements. Mzee Sulemani uttered some
proverbial wisdom and waited with a smile while Hamza
fumbled. The carpenter laughed equally at his successes
and his failures and applauded him anyway. ‘I only went
to school to read the Koran and then just for a year.
After that I was sent to work as my father and his
master required.’
‘His master?’ Hamza asked although he thought he
already knew the answer.
‘Our master,’ Mzee Sulemani said with composure. ‘My
father was a slave and so was I. Our master freed us
in his will, may God have mercy on his soul. It was my
father’s wish that I should learn to be a carpenter and
the master allowed it. So I had to stop attending school
and go to work. The few suras I know, I learned by
heart. Alhamdulillah,even those few have freed me from
the condition of a beast.’
Mzee Sulemani described Hamza’s skills to the
merchant who chose to ignore this information for a
while, then one day he asked, ‘What is this about you
being able to read and speak German? Where did you
learn that? I thought you told me you did not go to
school.’
‘I didn’t go to school. I picked it up here and there,’
Hamza said.
‘Where exactly? Mzee Sulemani tells me he gives you
lines from the Koran and you translate them into
German. You don’t pick up that kind of German here
and there.’
‘They are very poor translations. I do my best,’
Hamza said.
Khalifa was present during this exchange, and he
smirked at the merchant and said, ‘He has his secrets.
A man is entitled to keep his secrets to himself.’
‘What secrets?’ the merchant asked. ‘What is this
about?’
‘That’s his business,’ Khalifa said, pulling Hamza away,
chuckling with the pleasure of frustrating Nassor
Biashara.
That evening Khalifa told his friends at the baraza the
story of Hamza’s linguistic prowess and the merchant’s
questions and how Khalifa had frustrated him. Maalim
Abdalla was a teacher and, of course, a well-known
reader of newspapers in English and German. Khalifa
was a former clerk to Gujarati bankers and to the
pirate merchant. So it was left to Topasi, who had not
had the luxury of being able to attend school, to
express delight and admiration for Hamza’s skills,
especially for the additional fact that he had learned to
do this without going to school. ‘I have always said
school is a waste of time. Begging your pardon, Maalim,
not your school of course but many of them. You can
learn just as well by not going to school.’
‘Nonsense,’ Maalim Abdalla said without hesitation, and
no one contested the matter, not even Topasi, especially
because at that moment the tray of coffee appeared
and Hamza rose to collect it from Afiya. He saw from
her smile in the shadows that she had been listening to
the conversation. He put the tray on the porch for the
old friends and went off to the mosque for isha. The
others now let him go without protest or query. After
prayers he walked the streets for a little while as usual
and then headed back. He found that Khalifa’s friends
had left to go home for supper and he was sitting on
the porch on his own.
‘I kept some coffee for you,’ Khalifa said. ‘She can
read and write too,’ he said, indicating the door of the
house, undoubtedly referring to Afiya but not saying her
name. It was the first time he had made any reference
to her. It had occurred to Hamza before that she
moved around silently and diffidently, and Khalifa acted
as if she were invisible. That could be his way of being
courteous to an unmarried woman in the house,
drawing a veil over her by not mentioning her name or
calling attention to her. Or it could be a way of being
courteous about his own wife when speaking to
someone who was male and not a member of the
family. Hamza did not dare to ask for fear of offending.
He was not family and the womenfolk in the household
were none of his business. He would find a way to ask
sooner or later, he told himself, but not now. They sat
with their coffee in silence for a while and then both
rose at the same time. Khalifa went inside with the tray
while Hamza rolled up the mat and slipped it inside the
door.
*
It came to her during the night. She had heard them
talking about how good his German was so she thought
she would ask him for a German poem. Not even a
dummkopf could misunderstand that she was asking him
to translate a love poem for her, which was as good as
asking him to write her a love letter.
‘So you can read and write in German,’ she said to
him in the morning as she handed over the bread
money. ‘Can you find me a good poem and translate it
for me? I can’t read German.’
‘Yes, of course. I don’t know very many but I’ll find
one.’
At the end of the working day when she spoke to him
about a poem, he walked again on the shore road and
found a shaded place on the beach where he could sit
for a while. The sea came over jagged rocks here and
the beach was not popular with either fishermen or
swimmers. He loved looking at the waves from here,
just gazing for a while, following the line of the surf with
his eyes, watching it come in with a muted roar and
then retreat with an impatient hiss. Before leaving work
he had slipped into the merchant’s office while he was
talking to Mzee Sulemani and picked up a piece of
paper from his desk. It had the merchant’s name and
address printed across the top but it would be no
difficulty to tear that off. A love letter had to be
delivered in secret, and the smaller in size it was the
more easily it was concealed.
The only German poems he knew were in the book
that the officer had given him, Musen-Almanach für das
Jahr 1798 . He took the first four lines of Schiller’s ‘Das
Geheimnis’, and translated them for her:
Sie konnte mir kein Wörtchen sagen,
Zu viele Lauscher waren wach,
Den Blick nur durft ich schüchtern fragen,
Und wohl verstand ich, was er sprach.
He wrote them out on the piece of paper he had
stolen from Nassor Biashara’s office, trimmed it so that it
was only just big enough for the verse, then folded it
so it was no wider than two fingers. He knew how it
would look if this scrap of paper were intercepted. If
Afiya was Khalifa’s wife as he feared, then at the very
least Hamza would be thrown out of his room
accompanied by a stream of abuse and perhaps some
fully justified blows. But things had gone too far for him
to hesitate any more, and the following morning as he
met Afiya at the door, he slipped the square of paper
into her palm. On it he had written:
Alijaribu kulisema neno moja, lakini hakuweza –
Kuna wasikilizi wengi karibu,
Lakini jicho langu la hofu limeona bila tafauti
Lugha ghani jicho lake linasema.
She was already waiting at the door when he hurried
back from the café, and as she took the basket of
bread and buns from him, she did not let go of his
hand. She wanted to make sure he did not
misunderstand her. ‘I can read what your eye is saying
too,’ she said, referring to the last two lines of the
translation: My eye can see for certain / the language
her eye is speaking. Then she kissed the tips of her
fingers and touched his left cheek. A short while later,
when she brought him his breakfast tray, she slipped
into the room and into his embrace.
‘Habibi,’ she said.
‘Are you his wife?’ he blurted out while she was in his
arms and they were clinging to each other. It took her
by surprise. She was relishing the moment, holding his
sweet body in her arms, and he asked if she was a
wife! She pulled back from him and felt his arms
restraining her. ‘I’m sorry,’ he whispered.
‘Whose wife?’ she asked, alarm in her eyes too.
He hooked a thumb towards the house behind him. As
his meaning became clear to her, the alarm in her eyes
turned to mischief and she smiled as she sank back into
his arms. ‘I’m nobody’s wife … yet,’ she said before
freeing herself and leaving.
*
It was a Friday morning when Afiya slipped into the
room and embraced him and afterwards left him
speechless with joy. On Fridays they only worked
half-days in the yard. Almost everywhere else also shut
down at midday so that people could go to juma’a
prayers in the main mosque in the town. Not everyone
went, of course, despite the early release from work,
only those who were obedient to God’s command and
those who had no choice, mainly children and the youth.
Neither Khalifa nor Nassor Biashara went. Hamza did –
the little saint – because he liked sitting among a crowd
of people in such benign mood, listening without paying
full attention to the painstakingly devout words of the
imam’s sermon. He had not been forced to go as a
child and now it gave him pleasure to make his own
choices. Then he knew, he just knew, Afiya would find a
way to come to his room in the afternoon. He kept his
window closed and the door slightly open, and in the
glaring heat of early afternoon when sensible people
stayed indoors or lay down to rest, she came dressed
in her buibui on her way to somewhere. The room filled
with her scent as he shut the door. They kissed and
caressed and murmured to each other for an
exhilarating few minutes, but when he tugged gently at
her buibui whose slippery material prevented him from
properly feeling her body, she shook her head and
freed herself from him. Afiya said she had to go
otherwise Bi Asha will miss her and make a fuss. Her
excuse for coming out was to go to Muqaddam Sheikh’s
shop for the eggs she needed for the dessert she was
making.
‘What’s the rush?’ he said.
‘She knows the Muqaddam’s shop is only a few
minutes away.’
‘Do you have to work for her?’ he asked, reluctant to
let her leave.
Afiya looked surprised. ‘I don’t work for her. I live
here.’
‘Don’t go,’ he said.
‘I must go now, I’ll tell you later,’ she said.
For the rest of the day he dwelt on the memory of
her embraces and rebuked himself for being ridiculous
with impatience. It was also the last Friday before
Ramadhan and the sighting of the new moon that
evening filled the day with even more excitement. Bi
Asha appointed him to take word around the
neighbourhood, to make sure everyone knew about the
new moon so the blasphemers had no excuse for
eating or drinking in ignorance during the following day.
He took a long walk instead and kept out of her way,
having no wish to be mocked as a pious busybody.
So much changed during Ramadhan. Work started
later and many shops and premises did not open until
the afternoon as people slept to shorten the day and
then stayed up late into the night. The merchant
considered these practices lazy and old-fashioned and
asked his employees to work their usual hours, but he
could not persuade all of them to agree. Khalifa took no
notice of the merchant and closed the warehouse at
midday and went home to sleep. Idris and Dubu and
Sungura pronounced themselves exhausted with hunger
and thirst at some point in the early afternoon and
collapsed for a sleep in a shady place in the yard or
simply slunk away. Mzee Sulemani insisted on his lunch
break during which he said his prayers and recited the
suras of the Koran that he knew by heart and then
worked on his embroidered cap. He regretted, he told
Hamza, that he could not read the Koran properly, as
that was what people were required to do during
Ramadhan, to read a chapter of the holy book every
day until all thirty chapters were finished by the end of
the month.
Eating arrangements also changed, not just the daylight
hunger and thirst but how the misery was brought to
an end. Ramadhan was a communal event and it was
considered virtuous to make the breaking of fast after
sunset into a shared meal, so instead of going off to
find something in a café, Hamza was invited inside to
eat the food of the household. Ramadhan food was
always special as the cooks took greater trouble and
had more time to plan and prepare. The delicious meals
were also a reward for the stoicism of the day. Hamza
broke fast with Khalifa on the porch where in the
traditional way they shared a few dates and a cup of
coffee and were then called inside to the modest feast
Bi Asha and Afiya had prepared and which they sat
down to eat with the men. It was not the quantity but
the variety of dishes that made it into a feast, and they
talked about the food and praised its preparation as
they ate. Even Bi Asha was more mellow than she had
been in the past and found teasing words to say to
Hamza about his growing skills as a carpenter and his
newfound fame as a reader of German. Next thing we
know you’ll start composing poetry, she said. Hamza
just managed to resist looking at Afiya but made
enough of a movement before he arrested it for Bi
Asha to look towards its intended direction and then
back at Hamza, who dropped his eyes and busied
himself with the fish.
After the meal he sat on the porch with Khalifa where
they were joined soon after by Maalim Abdalla and
Topasi, and sometimes other neighbours who stopped by
for a chat. Ramadhan evenings were full of talk and
comings and goings. On other porches or in cafés that
stayed open late, marathon games of cards or dominoes
or coram went on, but on Khalifa’s porch no such
frivolity was entertained. There the talk was still focused
on political intrigue, human foibles and old scandals.
Hamza went walking the streets, which were thronged
with people, and sometimes he stopped to watch one of
the games or to listen to the raillery among street wits.
The musicians had stopped playing after Ramadhan
began but he hoped it would only be for the first few
days. Every night during the previous weeks, the group
he had first heard by chance played a short concert for
their devoted audience of whom he had become a
member. They played for sheer love, it seemed,
because they never asked for money and no one
offered to pay. Some nights the woman sang, and in
time Hamza came to hear several of her repertoire of
love songs and was moved by the longing expressed in
them. He wished he could bring Afiya to listen to the
music, but he did not know how he could do that or
even when he could tell her about them. Now that
Ramadhan was here there was no breakfast, and no
need to collect the money for bread and buns from the
café. He was careful not to look at her when he went
to eat the evening meal inside but he knew that their
exchange of glances had been intercepted by Bi Asha,
who now watched him suspiciously.
Then on the first Friday of Ramadhan, at the same
time as she had done the previous week, Afiya slipped
into his room whose door he had left ajar. They
embraced and undressed fully and made love with sinful
hunger, hushing and shushing each other in case they
were overheard.
‘It’s the first time,’ she whispered.
He paused for a second and then whispered back, ‘Me
too.’
‘You expect me to believe that?’ she said.
‘Maybe it doesn’t make any difference,’ he whispered,
laughing, pleased that he had not failed and that she
had taken him to be more experienced.
‘We shouldn’t be doing this during the fast,’ she said
later as they lay naked on his mat. ‘The only way this
can be right is if you promise to be mine and I promise
to be yours. I promise.’
‘I promise too,’ he said, and they both chuckled at
their absurd love-talk.
She reached across his body and put her right hand
on the scar on his left hip. She ran her fingers over it
for several seconds, stroking it and feeling it as if she
would smooth its jagged contours. Just as she was
about to speak he reached up and put his left hand
over her mouth.
‘Not now,’ he said.
Gently, she took his hand away. ‘All right, it’s your
secret,’ she said, and then saw that there were tears in
his eyes. ‘What is it? What happened to you?’
‘It’s not a secret. Just not now, please, not this
minute,’ he said pleadingly. ‘Not after love.’
She shushed him and kissed him, and after he had
quietened down she held up her left hand so that it
was close to his face, then she flexed her fingers as if
she was trying to make a fist but the palm would not
close. ‘It’s broken. I cannot grip with this hand,’ she
said.
‘What happened?’ he asked.
She smiled and reached for his face with her damaged
hand. ‘That’s what I asked you and you burst into
tears,’ she said. ‘My uncle broke it. He was not really
my uncle, but I was living in his house when I was
younger. He broke it because he said it was wrong for
me to know how to write. He said, what will you write?
You’ll write ugly things, you’ll write notes to a pimp.’
They lay in silence for a while. ‘I am very sorry.
Please tell me more about it,’ Hamza said.
‘He hit me with a stick. He was in a rage when he
found out I could write. My brother taught me but then
he had to leave so I went back to live with my uncle.
When he saw I could read and write, he lost his
temper and hit me across my hand, but he hit the
wrong hand so I can still write. But it makes chopping
vegetables hard work,’ she said.
‘Tell me from the beginning,’ he said.
She stood up and started to get dressed, and he did
too. She sat in the barber’s chair while he stayed on
the floor, leaning against the wall. ‘All right, but after I
tell you and I ask you about what happened to you,
you will not push me away?’
‘You are my beloved. I promise,’ he said.
‘I’ll be quick because I have to go and help Bimkubwa
with the cooking. I’m supposed to be visiting a
neighbour and if I’m late she’ll send someone there to
fetch me.’
Then she told him how her brother came back for her
when she was ten years old when she did not even
know she had a brother, how she lived with him for a
year and he taught her to read and write, and then he
went off to war. ‘My brother Ilyas,’ she said.
‘Where is he now?’ Hamza said.
‘I don’t know. I haven’t seen him or heard from him
since he went to the war.’
‘Is it not possible to find out?’
She looked at him at length. ‘I don’t know. We tried,’
she said and then glanced down at his hip. ‘Did you get
that in the war?’
‘Yes,’ he said. ‘During the war.’
*
That night after breaking fast Khalifa sat on the porch
as usual but for some reason his two old friends were
late in coming. Hamza sat with him to keep him
company when he would rather have gone for a walk
to see if the musicians were back performing again.
They made casual conversation for a while and Hamza
mentioned the group. Khalifa as usual knew about them
and their history without stirring from his porch. ‘The
power of rumour and gossip,’ he said with a smile.
‘They stop playing during Ramadhan, only holding
rehearsals indoors. The pious ones don’t approve of
anything festive during the holy month. They want us all
to suffer and starve and rub our foreheads raw with
prayers.’ Then out of a lengthy silence, and without
looking at Hamza, Khalifa said, ‘You like her.’
When he turned to look at him, Hamza nodded.
‘She is a good woman,’ Khalifa said, once again looking
away and speaking softly, taking any note of challenge
from his voice. This was a delicate matter. ‘She has
lived with us for many years and Bi Asha and I have
watched over her like our own. I need to know your
intentions. I have a responsibility.’
‘I didn’t know you were related,’ Hamza said.
‘I promised her brother,’ Khalifa said.
‘Ilyas?’ Hamza said.
‘So you know about him. Yes, Ilyas, he lived here in
this town with his little sister when he came back from
his wanderings. He got a job at the big sisal factory
because he could speak good German. They liked that.
It was at this time that we became friends. It was soon
after we were married living here. Ilyas sometimes
brought the little girl when he visited us. Then when the
war came he joined up, I don’t know why. Maybe he
had started to think of himself as a German, or maybe
he always wanted to be an askari. He used to tell the
story of how a Shangaan askari kidnapped him and
took him to a mountain town where he was released
and cared for by a German landowner. He told me
once that since that encounter with the Shangaan, he
had secretly thought it would be surprisingly fulfilling to
be a schutztruppe. Then when the war came he could
not resist. We don’t know if he is alive still. It’s eight
years now since he went to the war and we have not
heard from him since. I promised to keep an eye on
her,’ Khalifa said. ‘I don’t know how much you know
about her.’
‘She told me about her relatives in the country.’
‘They treated her like a slave. Has she told you that?
The man she called her uncle beat her with a stick and
broke her hand. When he did that she sent me a note
– yes, that’s right. Ilyas taught her to read and write,
and I told her if she was in trouble she was to write a
note addressed to me and give it to the shopkeeper in
the village. That’s what she did, the brave little thing.
She wrote a note and the shopkeeper gave it to a cart
driver who brought it to me. So I went and got her
and she has lived here for the last eight years. It will
do her good to make her own life now,’ Khalifa said.
‘Have you spoken to her?’
‘Yes,’ Hamza said.
‘That makes me happy,’ Khalifa said. ‘You must tell me
more about your people, your lineage. What are the
names of your father and mother, and what are the
names of their mothers and fathers? You can tell me
this later. I have seen enough of you to be reassured
but I promised Ilyas. I feel a responsibility. Poor Ilyas,
his life was attended with difficulties yet he lived under a
kind of illusion that nothing bad could ever happen to
him on this earth. The reality was that he was always
on the point of stumbling. You could not imagine
someone more generous nor anyone more self-deluded
than Ilyas.’
Hamza had begun to think of Khalifa as a sentimental
bearer of crimes, someone who took a share of
responsibility for other people’s troubles and for wrongs
done in his time: Bi Asha, Ilyas, Afiya and now Hamza,
people he quietly cared about while disguising this
unexpected concern with outspoken brashness and
persistent cynicism.
*
Afiya came again to Hamza’s room the following Friday
but this time she told Bi Asha that she was visiting her
friend Jamila who had moved away from her parents’
house to the other side of town, so they knew they
had the whole afternoon.
‘I surprise myself with my audacity,’ she told him.
‘Telling lies, sneaking into my lover’s room in the middle
of a Ramadhan afternoon, having a lover at all. I would
never have thought I had it in me, but I don’t know
how I could not come when you are lying here a few
feet away from me.’
They made love in whispers and then lay in the
afternoon gloom without talking for a while. Eventually he
said, ‘I can’t get over how beautiful this is.’
She ran her hands slowly all over him as if learning
him by heart, over his brow, his lips, over his chest,
down his leg and the inside of his thigh. ‘You cried out,’
she said. ‘Was it your leg?’
‘No,’ he said smiling. ‘It was ecstasy.’
She slapped his thigh playfully and then massaged the
scar on his hip as she had done before. Tell me, she
said.
He began to tell her about his years in the war. He
started with the morning march to the training camp,
then the boma and the drills in the Exerzierplatz, how
exhausting but exhilarating it was, how brutal the culture
was. He told her about the officer and how he taught
him German. He told her quickly at first because there
was so much to tell. She listened without interruption
and did not ask questions, just giving a soft gasp now
and then in reaction. When he talked about the officer
she shook her head slightly and asked him to repeat
what he said, and he saw that she did not want him to
rush quite so much. He slowed down and provided
more details: his eyes, the unnerving intimacy, the
language games he liked to play. He explained about
the ombasha and the shaush and the Feldwebel.
‘He did this, the Feldwebel,’ Hamza said. ‘At the very
end of the fighting, when we were all exhausted and
half-mad from the bloodletting and cruelty we had been
steeped in for years. He was a cruel man, always a
cruel man. He cut me down in a rage, with his sabre,
but maybe he always wanted to hurt me, I don’t know
why. It was because of the officer, I think.’
‘How because of the officer?’ she asked.
He hesitated for a moment. ‘The officer was very
protective of me. He wanted me to be close to him. I
don’t know why … I’m not sure why. He said I like the
look of you. I think some people … the Feldwebel and
maybe the other Germans too … thought there was
something wrong in this, something improper …
something … too much, too fond.’
‘Did he touch you?’ she asked softly, wanting him to
be explicit, wanting him to say what he needed to say.
‘He slapped me once, and sometimes he touched my
arm when he talked to me, just lightly, not touching like
that. I think they thought he was … touching me. He
said things like that to me, the Feldwebel, ugly accusing
things. It shamed me, his obsessive cruelty, as if I had
done something to deserve it.’
She shook her head in the gloom. ‘You are too good
for this world, my one and only. Don’t be ashamed,
hate him, wish ill on him, spit on him.’
He was silent for a long while and she waited. Then
she said, ‘Go on.’
‘After I was injured the officer had me taken to a
German mission, a place called Kilemba. The pastor
there was a doctor and he healed me. It is a beautiful
place. I was there for more than two years, helping in
the mission, getting better, reading the Frau’s books.
When the British medical department took over, which
took them a while, they told the pastor his medical
training was not up to official requirements. He was not
a fully qualified doctor. They wanted to upgrade the
mission infirmary to a rural clinic but could not let the
pastor be in charge of it so he decided it was time to
return to Germany. It was time for me to move on too.
I took work where I found it and then moved on, on
farms, in cafés and eating houses, sweeping the streets,
as a house servant … anything I could get. It was hard
sometimes, with the leg, and probably in the end I
overdid it, but I worked in Tabora, Mwanza, Kampala,
Nairobi, Mombasa. I had no destination in mind, or at
least I did not think so at the time,’ he said, smiling.
‘Only now I can see I did.’
After another long silence while his words sank in, Afiya
got up and began to dress.
‘It must be getting late. I want to hear everything, I
want to hear more about the good pastor and his
mission and how he healed you, but now I must go,’
she said. ‘She will be angry if I’m late back because
she has become suspicious. She told me someone has
made an enquiry for me, but it is too late now. I am
no longer available. When you come in to break fast I
will still be smelling of you. I’ll miss loving you until next
time. As I listen to you, I also think of Ilyas. He is older
than you. Did I tell you that he sings beautifully? I
imagine what it must have been like for him in the war
and if he is well somewhere, talking to someone like
you are talking to me.’
‘We can find out. We can try,’ Hamza said, correcting
himself. ‘There are records. The Germans are good with
records. Then you’ll know what happened to him.’
‘What can we find out? Maybe this way I don’t have
to know for sure, and what happened has happened. If
he is well somewhere, my knowing does not make any
difference to him, and if he is well somewhere, perhaps
he does not want to be found,’ she said. ‘I must go.’
12
‘Good fortune is never permanent, if it comes at all,’
Khalifa said on the third night of Idd as they sat on the
porch. ‘It’s only months that you’ve been with us but it
seems that I have known you for longer. I have
become used to you. I knew from the start that there
was something alive behind your zombie appearance.
You looked as if you were about to collapse in a heap
in front of me when you first arrived. Now look at you.
You have found work that suits you and you have even
pleased that slow-witted miser of ours, only you need to
ask him for a pay rise now that you’ve turned out to
be a competent carpenter. Oh, no, you’re going to be
the saint who will wait humbly for his desserts to come
to him!
‘But listen to what I am saying: good fortune is never
permanent. You cannot always be sure how long the
good moments will last or when they will come again.
Life is full of regrets, and you have to recognise the
good moments and be thankful for them and act with
conviction. Take your chances. I am not blind. I have
been looking and I have seen what I have seen and I
have understood, and some of what I have seen has
made me anxious. I thought I would wait until you were
ready to speak to me, that I would not rush you or
embarrass you, and that in the meantime nothing
unseemly would happen. Now that Ramadhan is over
and all the holiness is behind us, now that Idd has
arrived and a new year has begun, it may also be the
time for you to show some conviction. If you wait too
long you may lose the moment or else be drawn into
something regrettable. So I am giving you a little nudge.
‘Bi Asha also has eyes in her head and a mind to
work things out with and, as I am sure you have
noticed by now, a tongue with which to speak about
them. I don’t know if she has spoken to Afiya, though I
expect we would know if she had. She has ideas of her
own and they may not suit you. I have some idea of
your feelings for Afiya, you told me of them yourself. It
could be this is one of those decisive moments I am
speaking of, and which I am eager for you not to miss.
Am I talking in riddles or do you understand what I
mean? I can see you do. I do not mean to rush you,
nor am I in any hurry to get rid of Afiya. I asked you
before if you’ve spoken to her and you said you have.
If it is agreed between you, then I am happy. I like the
idea, but you will need to tell me something about your
people so we can be sure that no harm is done. Why
don’t you speak about yourself? Your silences look
suspicious, as if you have done something bad.’
‘Why shouldn’t I lie just like you told me to before?
Why should I not just make something up?’ Hamza
asked, provoking him because he knew where he was
heading and he was confident of the outcome.
‘Yes, I know I said you should just lie but this is
different. This is not something to joke about, this is not
about keeping the peace and moving things along.
Perhaps you think I am being a meddlesome patriarch,
interfering in the way a young woman might choose to
live her life. I am not her father or her brother but she
has lived with us since she was a child and I have a
responsibility to her. It is important that we know about
you so our minds can be at rest. You don’t have
anywhere to live, and it is likely you will continue to live
here with us. I would like you to continue to live here
with us, so that too is another reason we need to know
more about you. You could be anybody. Of course, I
don’t believe for one minute that you did something bad
before you came here, or no worse than the rest of us
have, but I need you to tell me that. Look me in the
eye and tell me. If you tell me a lie about yourself, I’ll
see it in your eyes.’
‘You have great faith in your powers,’ Hamza said.
‘Try me. Tell me the truth and I’ll know it at once,’
Khalifa said so vehemently that it wiped the smile off
Hamza’s face. ‘All right, let me ask some questions and
you can answer as you wish. You said you lived here
many years ago when you were quite young. Tell me
how that came about.’
‘That’s not a question,’ Hamza said, not yet able to
give up the provoking tone.
‘Don’t be irritating. I know that’s not a question. All
right, how did you come to live in this town when you
were young?’ Khalifa asked irritably, not at all amused
by Hamza’s playfulness.
‘My father gave me away to a merchant to cover his
debts,’ Hamza said. ‘I didn’t know that was what he
had done until after the merchant took me with him, so
I don’t know what my father owed or why it was
necessary for him to give me away. Maybe the
merchant was punishing my father for being a bad
debtor. The merchant lived in this town and he brought
me here to work in his shop although he was not a
shopkeeper. The shop was only a small part of his
business, which was the caravan trade. He was like
your merchant pirate, Amur Biashara, he did all kinds of
business. He took me on one of his trips to the interior,
which lasted several months. It was incredible. We went
all the way to the lakes and beyond to the mountains
on the other side.’
‘What was his name?’ Khalifa asked.
‘We called him Uncle Hashim but he was not my
uncle,’ Hamza said.
Khalifa thought for a moment and then nodded.
‘Hashim Abubakar, I know who you mean. So you
worked for him. What happened to you?’
‘I didn’t work for him. I was bonded to him to secure
my father’s debts or something like that. The merchant
did not explain anything or pay me. He treated me like
I was his property.’
They sat silently for a while, each absorbed in his own
thoughts. ‘What happened to you?’ Khalifa asked again.
‘I could not bear to live like that any more so I ran
away to the war,’ Hamza said.
‘Like Ilyas,’ Khalifa said disdainfully.
‘Yes, like Ilyas. After the war I went to the town
where I had lived as a child with my parents but they
were no longer there, and no one knew where they
had gone. The merchant who took me away from
them, Uncle Hashim, told me that several years before I
ran away. He told me that they no longer lived there,
but I wanted to be sure. For a long time I did not want
to find them. I thought they had thrown me away and
did not want me. Then after the war I tried to find
them but I couldn’t. So I don’t have any people to tell
you about. I’ve lost them. I lost them when I was very
young and I don’t know what I can tell you about them
that will be of any use to a grown-up person who feels
a responsibility for another person. You want me to tell
you about myself as if I have a complete story but all I
have are fragments which are snagged by troubling
gaps, things I would have asked about if I could,
moments that ended too soon or were inconclusive.’
‘You’re already telling me a lot. What brought you
back to this town where you must have suffered such
shame?’ Khalifa asked.
‘Shame? What shame?’
‘To be bonded to another, to have your body and
spirit owned by another human being. Is there a
greater shame than that?’
‘The merchant did not own me body and spirit,’
Hamza said. ‘Nobody owns anyone body and spirit. I
learned that a long time ago. He had use of me while I
lacked the wisdom and the skill to run away, only even
then I did not know enough to keep myself safe and
ran away to war. If I felt shame it was for my father
and my mother, but that only came later when I was
older and knew more about shame myself. I came back
to this town because there was nowhere else I knew. I
wandered everywhere, doing work that was slowly killing
me, and in the end I just drifted back here, I suppose.
‘I made a friend while I was first here. When I think
back to my years, I think that he was the only friend I
ever made in my life, and I felt a tug to return when I
was lost and sad about many things. He was bonded to
the merchant too, but when I came back the shop was
gone and I couldn’t find him. I didn’t dare ask people
about Uncle Hashim in case my father’s debt had
passed on to me.’
‘That was wise of you. It’s always best to be cautious,
I know you know that. I can tell you what happened to
your merchant Hashim Abubakar,’ Khalifa said, smiling,
happy as always to be the bringer of news, the vendor
of gossip. ‘The young man who ran the shop for him
absconded with all the cash the merchant had hidden in
the house. He ran away with the merchant’s young wife
too, his second wife. The pair of them disappeared,
have never been heard of since. That was just before
the war started so who knows what might have
happened to them? So many people were lost in the
war. For the merchant it was a great scandal and he
sold up and went off somewhere. The last I heard of
him he was in Mogadishu or Aden or Djibouti or
somewhere in those parts. He was one of the last of
those caravan merchants so his time was up anyway.
The Germans wanted to put an end to all that and
control everything themselves. What was the name of
this friend who worked for Hashim Abubakar?’
‘His name was Faridi,’ Hamza said.
‘That’s exactly the young man,’ Khalifa said, slapping
his thigh with delight as his story was growing even
more nicely viscous. ‘What a rogue, hey! The money
and the wife! He must have been a proper rascal, this
friend of yours.’
‘I was so young when I was first brought here and
he looked after me like a brother. Neither of us knew
anyone really, we just worked in the shop day and
night. Sometimes we went to town but he did not know
where he was either. We wandered around. If he
absconded with the money just before the war then it
must have been soon after I ran away too. The young
wife he ran away with was his sister. She was also
bonded to Uncle Hashim.’
Khalifa sighed at this new detail, which was now going
to make his story so impossibly rich that no one would
believe it. ‘So that’s who you are,’ he said. ‘I was here
working for my pirate merchant and you and your
friend were at the other end of town plotting the
downfall of another pirate. I don’t know why but it
makes me happy to think of your friend Faridi running
away and leaving the merchant to face the shame. We
all thought it must have been the young wife who
planned it. How else could he have known where the
merchant hid his money? They must have been rogues,
both of them, to take it all. Well, for their sakes, I hope
they are never found because it was wrong to take
that money, even if Faridi was a friend of yours.’
‘What happened to the house? It used to be there at
the end of the shore road. It had a lovely garden. I do
remember that right, don’t I?’ Hamza asked.
‘An Indian businessman bought it and demolished it to
build the mansion that stands there now. Not everyone
loves a garden. The businessman came with the British.
When they took over from the Germans, the British
brought in their own people to do business here. They
brought them from India and from Kenya, and those
new Indians sank their teeth in here fast and sure, and
here they still are. They are taking over all the
commerce and telling the government that they are
British citizens and must have the same rights as the
mzungus, and not be treated as if they are no better
than us natives.’
*
On the fourth and last day of Idd, while there was still
a trace of celebration in the morning air, Afiya pushed
open the door of Hamza’s store room to bring him his
breakfast tray with a slice of bread and cup of tea.
Because it was still Idd, she brought a festive slice of
bread soaked in beaten egg and fried. He took the tray
from her and put it down on the table and she was
then free to slip into his arms. That was when he asked
her. He had told Khalifa that he would ask her himself,
because he wanted her to say that it was something
she wanted too. Khalifa said that was not how things
were done. He, Hamza, should speak to Khalifa who
would speak to Bi Asha who would ask Afiya. Then her
reply would travel back the same route. That was how
things were done, and that was how things will still be
done after Hamza had spoken to her, but if he wanted
to ask her himself as well, he should go ahead and ask.
Afiya was in his arms when he said, ‘Will it suit you if
we marry?’
She pulled back to look at his face, perhaps to make
sure he was not joking. When she saw how sombre his
expression was, she smiled and held him tighter and
then said, ‘Idd mubarak, it will suit me very well.’
‘I have nothing,’ he said.
‘Nor do I,’ she said. ‘We’ll have nothing together.’
‘We won’t have anywhere to live, just this store room
without even a mosquito net. We should wait until I can
afford to rent somewhere more fitting,’ he said.
‘I don’t want to wait,’ she said. ‘I did not think I
would find someone to love. I thought someone would
come for me and I would have no choice. Now you
have come and I don’t want to wait.’
‘There is nowhere to wash. Only the mat to sleep on.
You will live like an animal in a burrow,’ he said.
She laughed. ‘Don’t exaggerate,’ she said. ‘We can
wash and cook inside, and make love on the floor
whenever we want. It will be like a journey together
and we will find our way even if our bodies smell of old
sweat. She has been wanting me to go for years. She
said she did not like the way he looked at me. Ever
since I became a woman. She said he wanted to make
me his wife – Baba Khalifa. She said men are animals
like that. They have no restraint.’
‘I didn’t know,’ Hamza said. ‘You told me this is your
home.’
‘Bi Asha has a bitter heart. She hated that I was a
young woman. She wanted me to go but she hated
when a young man looked at me. Even a glance in the
street was enough to start her accusations. She said it
revolted her, the way men looked at me. She said I
encouraged it when I did no such thing. She wanted
me to go but she wanted an older man to come and
take me for his second wife. She did not want me to
feel attractive and young, but to be taken by someone
who would use me for his pleasure, who would degrade
me with his cravings. It’s the bitterness in her, it makes
her mean. She was not like that to me when I was a
child. She was fierce as you see her now but she was
not mean. It was when I grew into a woman that she
became like this.’
‘I didn’t know,’ he said again. ‘Did someone come for
you?’
She shrugged. ‘Twice. I didn’t know one of them. The
other was the manager of the café on the main road.
He saw me walking by. He has seen me walking by for
years, ever since I was ten years old. That’s how they
are, men like that, they have money and they want a
young woman to play with for a few months. They see
you walking in the street, and they say who is that
woman and they come for you because they can.
That’s what Baba Khalifa said.’
‘But you said no.’
‘I said no and Baba Khalifa said no. She said it was
because he wanted to keep me for himself. That was
when she first came out with it. She accused him of
that, for many days. When he brought you that day,
when he brought you inside, I think he wanted me to
see you. I don’t know if he really meant to do that,
maybe he just liked you. But I saw you, and each time
I saw you I felt a little more longing for you. I didn’t
know it would be like that. That’s why I don’t want to
wait, and why this room is not a burrow.’
‘Has she spoken to you about us? Khalifa said he did
not know if she had.’
‘Two days ago she said don’t bring shame to our
house, but she has said that before.’ Afiya smiled at
him. ‘Too late now.’
When he found out from Hamza that they planned to
live in the store room, Khalifa would not hear of it.
Hamza could not repeat what Afiya had told him about
her persecution, and after stuttering helplessly he said Bi
Asha’s name. Khalifa shrugged and then shook his head
emphatically. ‘You will come and live in the house with
her, with us,’ he said. ‘Not out there like vagrants.
Inside will be more comfortable for you. That room may
be adequate for a jaluta like you who is used to
wandering like a hooligan. It is not suitable for a
daughter of our house.’
‘We will find our own place to rent,’ Hamza said.
‘Maybe it’s best to wait for a while until I can afford
something better.’
‘What is there to wait for?’ Khalifa asked. ‘You can
move in here now and when you are ready to rent, off
you go.’
‘Well, we’ll see,’ Hamza said, reluctant to be forced
inside, to be forced to live intimately with Bi Asha’s
distemper.
The couple married fourteen days later. Their wedding
was so quiet that the merchant Nassor Biashara and
the people at the timber yard did not know about it
until after it happened. Khalifa invited the imam and his
baraza friends for a meal, and Bi Asha did the same for
her women neighbours. They hired a cook to come to
the house to prepare a biriani and he took over the
backyard for that. The women were in Bi Asha and
Khalifa’s bedroom, with the bed upended and pushed
against the wall. The men gathered in the guest room
where the imam invited Hamza to ask for Afiya in
marriage. Since the ceremony was an agreement being
entered into in front of witnesses, it was customary at
this point to state what mahari or dowry the man
intended to offer and for the bride or her representative
to consider whether this was satisfactory. Such matters
would have been discussed well beforehand but were
confirmed in front of witnesses. Hamza had nothing to
offer as mahari. He told this to Khalifa who said the
decision to take him without was up to Afiya. Since she
waved that conversation away – we’ll have nothing
together – this part of the ceremony was quietly
ignored, and Hamza simply asked if Afiya would accept
him for her husband and Khalifa accepted in her name.
The news was conveyed to Afiya and Bi Asha’s guests
in the other room who welcomed it with ululations. They
were then served the meal and that was the end of
the festivities.
Khalifa allowed them no choice but to move in. He was
utterly insistent, and Afiya shrugged and said they could
try it. There was always the store room if it did not
work out. Hamza moved his few belongings into Afiya’s
room: his small shoulder bag, which contained the copy
of Musen-Almanach für das Jahr 1798 the Oberleutnant
had left for him, another book by Heinrich Heine, Zur
Geschichte der Religion und Philosophie in Deutschland,
which the Frau gave to him as a parting present, his
mat and his clothes.
Afiya’s room was bigger than the store room, and it
was comfortable and within easy reach of the
washroom. There was a curtain across both the window
and the door, which she often kept open for the breeze
to enter until bedtime. The head of the bed was pushed
hard against one wall, with just enough room left for
them to slip in on either side. A rectangular wooden
frame was suspended from the ceiling for the mosquito
net. There was an old rickety thin-panelled cupboard
against the opposite wall, and when he saw it for the
first time Hamza told her he would make a new
cupboard for them in the workshop. That would be her
mahari. Inside the cupboard there was a small locked
box painted in green and red diagonal stripes. She
opened it for him and showed him its treasures: the
notebooks she had used when her brother taught her
to read, the marbled ledger that Baba gave her, a gold
bracelet Ilyas bought for her for Idd during the one
year they lived together, now too small for her to wear,
a picture postcard of the mountain overlooking the town
where he had worked on the German’s farm and then
gone to school, and the tiny scrap of the Schiller poem
Hamza had translated for her.
Afiya’s room opened out on to the yard, which was
where the household’s cooking was done, and where
they ate and washed, and where the women of the
house spent several hours of the day. It was their part
of the house and male strangers did not go there.
Hamza was not a stranger any more but he did not
feel like a member of the family either. After what he
had heard about Bi Asha’s bitterness, he was nervous
about the arrangement and how she would take his
presence in the yard. He greeted her when he came
upon her and she made some kind of acknowledgement
without eye contact but there was no conversation
between them. He felt her resistance in the air and
cringed with discomfort and self-dislike. He did not want
to be there. As soon as he was up in the morning he
used the washroom, drank his tea in the yard with
Khalifa who joined him and insisted on this arrangement,
and left the house together with him. When he returned
in the afternoon the yard was unoccupied and Hamza
went straight to their room where Afiya was waiting for
him. In the evening Bi Asha and Afiya prepared supper
in the yard and sometimes women neighbours called so
he made sure to be out of the room so they could talk
without being overheard. That was what he understood
manners required. After several days of these unsettled
jitters Afiya told him to stop scurrying out of the way.
‘Usijitaabishe,’ she said. ‘Don’t worry yourself. He asked
you to live here, so just ignore her and she’ll get used
to it.’
‘She doesn’t want me here,’ he said. ‘Balaa,
remember? She thinks I will bring disaster.’
‘She was just being cruel,’ Afiya said. ‘She is not that
cranky.’
His anxiety about Bi Asha did little to diminish his
pleasure in the new intimacies Afiya and he now came
to know when they were alone together. Luck had
preserved him through the war and brought him into
her life, and the world always moves on despite the
chaos and waste in its midst.
Nevertheless, living in the yard was a tense affair.
Even when he made casual conversation with Bi Asha
he was always aware of an edge to her words as if
she were likely to say something wounding the next
moment. When she spoke sharply to Khalifa he ignored
her, as if she had said nothing. Even when she spoke
about everyday matters, the price of fish or the quality
of the spinach available in the market, it seemed these
things too caused her bitterness and discontent. He did
not know how long he would be able to bear such
ill-tempered patronage.
The merchant Nassor Biashara said to him, ‘Aha, why
do you look so gloomy? My wife told me that you
married a few days ago, and you did not even invite
any of us to the wedding. You should be looking joyful!
Or is it maybe you’re not getting enough sleep?
He-he-he. I know Afiya, or I did when she was young.
My wife tells me she is now a very lovely woman. My
congratulations. It’s all working out for you, eh? You
deserve it. Look at you. You have a good job and now
a good woman to help you bear the burdens and it’s
me you have to thank for it. I’m not asking for
gratitude, you have worked hard, but it was all down to
me. I saw you and I thought: Why not give this dopey
young man a chance? He looks like a loser but maybe
given an opportunity he could come good. I have an
intuition about people, you see. I saw something there in
that shambles you presented to the world. Now look at
you. Are you still living in that store room? I hope not,
not with your new wife. I hope you’ve found yourself
somewhere decent to live … You live with those two
grumblers! That is not a sensible start to your married
life. What do you mean, you can’t afford to rent a place
of your own? What are you talking about? Do you need
to rent a mansion with a steam bath and a walled
garden and a latticed veranda? What do you mean, you
would like a pay rise? I pay you enough, don’t I? I
treat you decently. I am not made of money, you
know. You are not going to become greedy now just
because you have a wife. Has Khalifa put you up to
this?’
When Mzee Sulemani heard about the wedding he said
to Hamza, ‘Ask the miser for a pay rise. It’s the least
he can do after all the work you have been doing here
since that drunkard Mehdi left. Alhamdulillah,may you be
blessed with many children. Can you say that in
German?’
‘Mögest du mit vielen Kindern gesegnet sein.’
Mzee Sulemani chuckled with pleasure as he always did
when Hamza delivered one of his translations.
FOUR
13
It was a time of ease for Hamza compared to preceding
years. The strain in their living arrangement with Bi Asha
and Khalifa lessened as the weeks and months passed
by or maybe they became inured to it. They found
ways of avoiding each other without seeming to be at
loggerheads, of not seeing Bi Asha’s accusing looks and
not hearing her growling undertones. Hamza learned to
keep out of her way so well that often he only saw her
briefly when he came home from work in the afternoon,
although her voice was never far away. Afiya was
always the first up, but Hamza was usually awake,
unable to sleep deeply once it was light. She made the
tea while he washed and then he left the house before
Khalifa and Bi Asha came out of their room.
When he arrived at the yard, Nassor Biashara was
always already there. They greeted each other and the
merchant gave him the key to the workshop without
any conversation and sometimes without even looking up
from his precious ledgers. After Mzee Sulemani arrived,
the three of them met briefly to discuss the schedule of
the day’s work and Nassor Biashara sometimes joined
them in the workshop, putting finishing touches to bowls
and cabinets or passing a critical opinion on a new
design. He was making plans to build padded sofas and
needed to employ an upholsterer in due course, but for
the time being he was experimenting with the frames.
The demand for furniture was constantly rising. His
freight business was also expanding, and contrary to
Khalifa’s predictions, investment in the propeller had
proved to be a great success, attracting more business
than could be conducted by one boat and requiring the
purchase of a larger motorised vessel. Nassor Biashara
liked to call it his steamer. The merchant’s affairs were
flourishing so much that he designed a signboard, which
he carved and painted himself and had Sungura fix on
the yard gates: Biashara Furniture and General
Merchandise.
‘I think we’ll have to extend the workshop and bring in
new equipment,’ he said, looking at Mzee Sulemani first,
whose expression remained blank, and then at Hamza
who nodded in support. ‘This is a big yard, isn’t it? We
could build a new workshop right across here, properly
equipped to win government contracts – school desks,
office furniture, that kind of thing. We can keep the old
workshop for home orders and vanity stuff. What do
you think?’
The more he spoke about the new workshop, which
he did often in the following weeks, the more he
addressed Hamza whom he was lining up to run it, so
it seemed. The British mandate government had
announced an expansion in school-building and a literacy
drive, which was the source of Nassor Biashara’s
excitement about a government contract. The
administration was also expanding its activities in
agriculture, public works and health care. If nothing else
it would show the Germans how to run a colony
properly. All these departments and projects needed
offices and offices needed desks and chairs. Hamza
nodded with carefully judged enthusiasm as Nassor
Biashara, who now preferred to be called a businessman
and not a merchant, talked himself into the new
venture. Sooner or later Hamza would ask for a big pay
rise but for the time being he bided his time.
He delayed going back for lunch to allow Khalifa and Bi
Asha to eat first. By the time he arrived they were
usually finished and making ready for their mandatory
siesta. He ate lightly, some rice and spinach and
whatever fruit was in season. Sometimes he had a
paratha, a small piece of fish and a bowl of yoghurt
and then went back to work. In the afternoon after he
returned he had a wash and lay down to rest for an
hour or so, and if she was in Afiya joined him in their
room and they talked and reprised the day. Often she
was out visiting then, seeing her friend Jamila who was
now a mother, or Khalida, Nassor Biashara’s wife, or
else attending one of the stream of obligatory functions
that filled women’s daily lives: memorial gatherings after
funerals, betrothals, weddings, sickbeds, visiting a mother
and her newborn.
In the evening Hamza strolled the streets and met the
people he had come to know and befriend, especially
one of the musicians in the group he went to listen to
whenever he could. His name was Abu and he was a
carpenter as well, a few years older than Hamza. They
met after the maghrib prayer in a café by the bridge
across the creek and talked with others who were
regulars there and who made room for him. Hamza
was not much of a talker, in a gathering of big talkers,
so he was always welcome. The tone of their
conversation was light-hearted and irreverent, often
salacious, and it seemed to him they vied with each
other to see who could make the most outrageous
banter. At times the comedy was so low and so
irresistible that his sides ached from laughing and yet
afterwards he knew that nothing of any consequence
had been said and that he had wasted his time in
shameful frivolity. Some evenings Hamza went with Abu
to the rehearsal room and sat with the musicians for an
hour or so while they played and practised.
Then he returned to the house – he was not yet able
to call it home – and sat with Khalifa and Maalim
Abdalla and Topasi while they pondered the state of the
world and turned over and analysed the latest outrages
and gossip. At that time the administration had started
publishing a Kiswahili monthly magazine Mambo Leo , to
inform those who could already read about world and
home affairs, about good practices in farming, about
medical hygiene and even sports news. Khalifa bought a
copy, which he passed on to Hamza and Afiya when he
finished with it. Maalim Abdalla came to the baraza with
his own copy and informed his friends about whatever
interesting item in there had caught his eye, which often
needed dismantling and debunking and exposing. At
other times he came with an old copy of the East
African Standard , the settler newspaper from Nairobi
that his friend who worked in the District Commissioner’s
office borrowed for him on an extended loan. Some of
the stories in the Standard provided compelling discussion
material for the three sages, especially the heated
exchanges between settlers who wanted to remove all
Africans from Kenya and make it what they called A
White Man’s Country, and those who wanted to remove
all Indians and only allow in Europeans but keep the
Africans as labourers and servants, with a sprinkling of
some savage pastoralists in a reserve for spectacle. The
propositions and their defenders sounded so strange that
it was if the settlers were living on the moon.
Hamza left them after collecting the coffee tray from
Afiya and went to the mosque for isha. Off you go, little
saint, Khalifa always cheered him away. When he
returned, he went straight to their room where Afiya
joined him for the sweetest part of the day. They talked
for hours, reading old newspapers, catching up with
each other’s lives, looking into the future, making love.
*
One night she woke up with a start beside him. She
gripped his upper arm and whispered his name. ‘Hamza,
shush, shush … stop now.’
His face was wet and his body was drenched in
sweat. There was a sob still in his throat as he came
awake. They lay quite still in the dark, Afiya’s grip firm
on his upper arm. ‘You were crying,’ she said. ‘Is it him
again?’
‘Him, yes. Sometimes it’s him, sometimes the officer.
Or else the pastor. It’s always them,’ he said. ‘Only it’s
not the person so much, it’s the feeling they bring.’
‘What feeling? Tell me.’
‘A feeling of danger, terror. Like great danger is
bearing down and there’s no escape. Such noise and
screams and blood.’
Then they lay still again in the dark for a long time.
Much later she asked, ‘Is it always the war?’
‘Always. Before, when I was a child, I was often
troubled by nightmares,’ he said. ‘Animals consuming me
while I lay prone, unable to move. It did not feel like
danger somehow, more like defeat, like torture. Now
when the nightmares come, they terrify me. Like what is
coming at me will crush me with great pain, will make
me suffer torments and I will drown in my own blood. I
can feel it filling my throat. That is the feeling I dread,
not the person. But sometimes it is him, the Feldwebel. I
don’t understand why seeing the pastor should make
me feel like this. I don’t know how he comes into it. He
healed me. I stayed on his mission for two years.’
‘Tell me some more about him,’ she said. ‘Tell me
about the tobacco sheds and the fruit trees and the
books the Frau lent you to read.’
She sensed him smiling in the dark. ‘You were listening
then. I thought you’d fallen asleep when I told you
about the Frau pastor. The pastor was a very thorough
man and the tobacco shed gave him much pleasure, I
think. There he was in full control. He always wanted to
be right, he could not help it. It was as if he had to
force himself to listen to other people, to teach himself
to be kind. It made you wonder that he chose to be a
missionary. I think it was she who taught him to be
forbearing when his natural inclination was to be stern.
She was effortlessly good and thoughtful and generous.
I will never forget her. She lent me books, yes. She
gave me their address in Germany. She said I should
send them news now and then. She wrote it in that
Heine book I told you about.’
‘Maybe you will write one day,’ she said. ‘Maybe you
will be able to forget that terrible time one day even if
you don’t forget her. Sometimes when I am away from
the house I think I will come home and find that you
are gone, that you have left me and disappeared
without a word. I don’t know if I understand everything
about you yet and I am so terrified that I will lose you
one day. I lost my mother and father before I even
knew them. I don’t know for sure if I remember them.
Then I lost my brother Ilyas who appeared like a
blessing in my childhood. I could not bear to lose you
too.’
‘I will never leave you,’ Hamza said. ‘I too lost my
parents when I was a child. I lost my home and very
nearly my life in my blind desire to escape. It was not
much of a life until I came here and met you. I will
never leave you.’
‘Promise me,’ she said, stroking him and signalling her
readiness for him.
*
Five months after their wedding, Afiya miscarried her first
pregnancy. She told Hamza when she missed her
second month but instructed him not to speak about it.
Who was he going to tell? he asked. They could not
help smiling and indulging in pleasant fantasies about the
Forthcoming, as they began to speak of the life within
her, speculating on gender and names. She did not
even dare call it a pregnancy, reminding him that Ilyas
had told her that their mother miscarried more than
once. She waited for nine days after her third month
before announcing to Hamza that it was now certain.
‘It’s a boy,’ she said.
‘No, it’s a girl, he said.
The following afternoon, on the tenth day after her
third missed period, Bi Asha spoke to Afiya. At first she
glanced at her lower abdomen and then she looked into
her eyes for a long moment.
‘Have you fallen?’ she asked.
‘I think so,’ Afiya said, quite surprised that she had
guessed when they were so careful to keep things to
themselves.
‘How many months?’ Bi Asha asked.
‘Three,’ Afiya said hesitantly, not wanting to sound too
definite in case it aroused Bi Asha’s disdain.
‘About time you fell,’ she said, with not a hint of
gladness in her voice. ‘Only … women often lose their
first.’
The next day, as she was hanging out the washing in
the yard, Afiya felt something wet on her thigh. She
hurried to her room and found that her underclothes
were dark red with blood. Bi Asha, who was also in the
yard at the time, followed her into her room and helped
her to undress. She fetched some old sheets and made
Afiya lie down.
‘Perhaps you won’t lose it,’ she said. ‘The clothes are
not very bloody. Just rest and let’s wait and see.’
The bleeding continued for the rest of the morning,
steadily staining the sheets Afiya lay on. She remained
still throughout, slowly becoming resigned to the loss.
When Hamza came back for lunch, Bi Asha at first tried
to keep him out of the room. These were matters for
women, she said, but he brushed her restraining hand
away and went to sit with his wife.
‘We celebrated too soon,’ Afiya said through her tears.
‘I don’t know how she knew. She said I would lose it.
She wished that on me.’
‘No,’ he said. ‘It’s just bad luck. Don’t pay any
attention to her.’
The worst of the bleeding was over by the next
morning although there was still some spotting. After
three days there were no signs of blood but Afiya was
exhausted and without strength and trying hard not to
feel sad. Bi Asha told her she must rest but she shook
her head, got up and did what chores she could
manage. Somehow word of her misfortune got out as
word always did by some means, and her friends Jamila
and Saada came to visit and Khalida, who never visited
because of Bi Asha’s feud with her husband, sent words
of commiseration and an offer of whatever help she
required. In the meantime Bi Asha fussed bossily over
her, preparing a soup made from maize, including the
silk, which she said was good for Afiya, and meals that
she said were appropriate for her feeble condition:
sautéed liver, steamed fish, milk jelly, stewed fruit. She
was like the Bi Asha Afiya had known as a child, her
voice still hard-bitten but her strokes kindly.
This period of grace lasted while she convalesced. After
three weeks the special meals stopped and the sharp
edge began to return to Bi Asha’s voice. The loss of
the pregnancy made Afiya feel more of a wife to
Hamza. He was tender with her for days afterwards,
holding on to her even in their sleep, his hand resting
on her shoulder or her thigh. He softened his voice
when he spoke to her as if loud tones would upset her.
After several days of this treatment and his
abstemiousness from making love to her, she reached
for him and whispered to him that his attentions were
now overdue. He was worried that she was hurting, he
said, but she soon demonstrated that he had no reason
to be concerned. It was strange also that the loss made
her feel more independent of the constraints of the
house, a grown-up person, almost a mother. She went
out to the market every morning and made decisions
about what to prepare for the household’s lunch without
consulting Bi Asha beforehand. She bought what looked
best and what took her own fancy, nothing unusual,
just bananas that looked dark green and plump or
yams or cassava freshly dug from the soil or newly
harvested pumpkins that glistened with wax. To her
surprise, Bi Asha did not make any objection, only now
and then scolding her and mocking her if she thought a
purchase too expensive or if a dish went wrong. Where
did you get this okra? It’s rotten, that kind of thing.
Most afternoons Afiya went to visit Jamila and Saada,
who now ran a small dress-making business from home,
and she sat with them and took on small unskilled tasks
they allowed her to do: sewing on buttons, measuring
and cutting the lace and ribbons that everyone loved to
have on their dresses. In time they gave her more
complicated tasks, and gradually she learned how to
measure material from a dress a customer wanted
copied, how to cut it to best effect, and to choose the
lace and the ribbons and the buttons from the Indian
haberdasher’s shop to which her friends took her. Since
all the customers were acquaintances and neighbours of
the sisters, they charged only a pittance for the work
they did. It was as much to fill the empty hours after
the daily household chores as for the money that they
did it, gladly doing something that engaged them and
required skill, to ease the frustration of the hemmed-in
lives they were forced to endure.
Afiya fell pregnant again several months later, just over
a year after their wedding. She told Hamza after her
second missed period and they waited chastely until they
were safely past the third month before beginning to
speak of the Forthcoming, and then only between
themselves.
It was at about this same time that Bi Asha’s pains
started – not that she did not suffer occasional aches
and pains like everyone else did, but this was different.
They were preparing lunch when Bi Asha rose from the
kitchen stool to fetch a fan because she was feeling hot
and a sudden excruciating pain stabbed her in the lower
back. It was so sudden and so fierce that she had no
choice but to collapse on the stool again with a cry of
alarm.
‘Bimkubwa,’ Afiya cried and rose to her feet with arms
outstretched. Bi Asha held on to the extended hands
and uttered an unaccustomed whimper. Afiya kneeled
down beside her, holding her trembling hands and
murmuring softly, ‘Bimkubwa, Bimkubwa.’ After a few
minutes of silent panting Bi Asha heaved a great sigh
and then arched her back to test if the pain was still
there. Afiya helped her to her feet and she took a few
steps around the yard without any mishap.
‘Lo, that was like someone had cut me in half,’ Bi
Asha said, her hands massaging her sides just above
the pelvis. ‘Go and fetch a mat for me. I’ll lie here on
the floor for a while. It must have been a spasm.’
Later that evening, Bi Asha asked Afiya to massage
her back as she had always done since she was a
child. She stretched out on a mat in her room while
Afiya kneeled beside her and massaged her from the
shoulders to the hips. Bi Asha groaned with contentment
and afterwards thought she felt much better. But the
pain did not go away. She complained daily about the
ache in her sides, which sometimes caught her so
unexpectedly that she could not prevent a cry. As time
passed she became worse. The pains began when she
rose from her bed and stayed with her most of the
day, then they came to her during the night as well
while she lay trying to rest.
‘You should go to the hospital to have that checked,’
Khalifa said. ‘You can’t just go on groaning and doing
nothing about it.’
‘No, which hospital? They don’t treat women there,’
she said.
‘What nonsense! I’m talking about the government
hospital,’ Khalifa said, inclined not to take her complaints
too seriously. ‘They’ve been treating women there since
German times.’
‘Only pregnant women,’ she said.
‘That is no longer true if it ever was. The government
wants all of us to be healthy so we can work harder. It
says so in Mambo Leo .’
‘Stop your drivel, you hopeless man. You think you’re
funny,’ she said. ‘Leave me alone.’
‘What about the Indian doctor?’ he suggested. ‘We can
get him to come here. He makes house calls.’
‘He is just a waste of money. He’ll take my money
and give me coloured water, which he will say is
medicine.’
‘Not at all,’ Khalifa said, smiling and teasing her. ‘You’re
just afraid of the jab. You know he gives everyone a
jab for almost any condition. Some people become so
addicted to the jab that they refuse to pay unless he
gives them one. We’ll get him to come and see you.
He’ll give you one injection and you’ll soon be better.’
It was evident now that it was not Bi Asha’s back that
was hurting but something inside, in the soft part above
her hips. She sat on a mat in the backyard for long
periods, her eyes closed, emitting an involuntary groan
every so often. Her expression was scowling and sullen,
and the unmistakable source of her misery was her own
body. Afiya tried to anticipate the chores Bi Asha might
have thought were hers. Bimkubwa, let me do it, she
said when Bi Asha was taking a broom to the backyard
or gathering clothes and bedding for the laundry, but
she was proud and pushed her away, saying, I am not
an invalid.
Her appetite diminished and she began to lose weight.
After one or two mouthfuls of cassava or rice she
gagged, unable to swallow. Afiya prepared bone soup for
her and mashed some fruit with yoghurt and sat with
her while she ate, in case she needed help. In the end
Bi Asha’s pride gave way and the pain forced her to
her bed, groaning and almost delirious. Khalifa pleaded
with her to go to the hospital or at least to see the
Indian doctor but Bi Asha said no, she did not need
that kind of attention. She did not want strange men
poking at her with that instrument they wore around
their necks and then put on your heart to drink your
blood. Instead she asked for the maalim, the hakim.
‘What do you think he’ll do? Say a prayer and make
you better. You’re an ignorant woman,’ Khalifa said,
turning to Afiya for support, hoping she would add her
own words of persuasion. ‘You are not important
enough for the hakim to come to you. He only goes to
the houses of the eminents and the moneybags. His
prayers are not cheap. There is something wrong with
your body. You need to see a doctor.’
‘Perhaps we can call the doctor to come here,’ Afiya
suggested. ‘He visits patients at home sometimes. I
know he does.’ She did not say she knew because the
doctor had visited Khalida when her son was ill with
jaundice, in case the name provoked Bi Asha into
further resistance.
Bi Asha smiled her derision. ‘Then he can charge us
even more for his rubbish. Go to the hakim’s house
and explain to him the pain I am enduring. Ask him
what he advises I should do.’
Afiya went to the hakim’s house as instructed. It was
by a mosque and beside an old cemetery. Its continued
use had been forbidden by the Germans many years
before for fear of infection and contamination, and their
threat to dig it up was only averted by the outbreak of
war. The British administration did not renew the threat
but upheld the prohibition on new burials, ordering that
the cemetery grounds be kept clear of undergrowth to
prevent the spread of malaria.
Afiya was shown into a downstairs room just beside
the front door. She was nearly six months into her
pregnancy so she sank carefully to her knees and
squatted as comfortably as she could while she waited
for the hakim to appear. There were thick straw mats
on the floor and a book-stand on which rested a copy
of the Koran and an inactive incense burner beside it
which nevertheless gave off a scent of ud. The window,
which was barred, was wide open and a soft light
filtered in through the overhanging branches of the
neem tree outside, which was the sole survivor from the
clearing of the adjoining cemetery.
The hakim was an elderly and ascetic man of
considerable eminence and respectability. He was dressed
in a brown sleeveless robe and wore a close-fitting white
cap. Afiya had not spoken to him before and was a
little awed by his air of assured self-possession. He did
not smile or beckon but slipped silently to his place
beside the book-stand and listened without speaking
while Afiya described Bi Asha’s condition. When she had
no more to say he asked after Bi Asha’s age and her
general health. His voice was deep and pliant,
accustomed to addressing multitudes. Then he said Afiya
should come back in the afternoon, to collect something
he will prepare to bring relief to the ailing woman.
When she went back in the afternoon he gave her a
small porcelain plate with a gilded border on which were
written lines of the Koran in a dark brown ink. He
explained that the ink was an extract of the flesh of the
walnut, which itself has medicinal qualities. He also gave
her an amulet. His instructions were for her to pour half
a coffee-cupful of water, very carefully, on to the plate
until the holy words dissolved. She was not to stir or
add anything to the liquid and once the writing was
dissolved she was to pass the plate to the ailing woman
to drink. The amulet was to be strapped to her right
ankle. Afiya was to bring the plate back in the morning
so that he could prepare it for her to collect another
dose in the afternoon. Afiya accepted these objects with
both hands and then handed over the small purse
Khalifa had given her for the hakim who accepted it
without checking the amount. This treatment went on for
several weeks without diminishing Bi Asha’s pain.
As the days went by, word got out that Bi Asha was
very unwell and neighbours and acquaintances began to
call on her. She received them in the guest room
because she did not want to be thought seriously ill, but
then she began to allow her visitors to come to her
bedside. It was they who persuaded her that she
should see the mganga who lived nearby. I’ve seen her
before, it did no good, Bi Asha said. No, not that one,
her visitors persisted, people speak well of this one. She
knows medicines.
The mganga came to the house and was closeted with
Bi Asha for a long time, asking her questions while she
examined her. Bi Asha asked that Afiya should stay with
her. The mganga was a very thin woman of uncertain
middle age, her eyes kohled and intense, her
movements commanding and precise. She talked almost
constantly while she was with Bi Asha, even
ventriloquising some replies to the questions she
addressed to her. After her first examination she left
some herbs which Afiya was to steep in warm water
and give to Bi Asha to drink before bed. It will help her
to sleep, the healer said. The mganga came every day
after that and rubbed potions and balm on the painful
areas, which made Bi Asha groan with contentment and
pronounce herself much improved. She made Bi Asha lie
on her back on the floor and covered her completely
with a thick blue calico cloth for several minutes. Then
she made her lie on her left side and ripple her body
from head to toe. She made her repeat this on the
right side, while she read prayers over her and sang
words Afiya did not understand. This ceremony was
performed for four days and afterwards the healer left
instructions for the food Bi Asha was to eat, even if
only a spoonful or two every day. Still, the pain did not
go away and the mganga whispered to Afiya that
perhaps they needed to call in a spirit healer in case it
was not the patient’s body that was the problem, in
case an invisible had taken her.
‘I told this to her,’ the mganga said. ‘Only a spirit
healer will be able to hear what the invisible desires
before releasing you. But she shook her head as if she
knows better. Without a spirit healer, how can she know
what the invisible wants? You have to know how to
make it speak.’
Afiya did not tell Khalifa about this conversation
because she knew he would scoff, but she told Hamza
who said nothing. In time Bi Asha was so bedridden
that she needed to use a bedpan, and it was then that
Afiya saw the blood in her urine. There were small
lumps of faeces in the pan as well so at first she was
not sure where the traces of blood came from, until the
next time when she had a pan with only urine and tiny
clots of blood in it.
‘Bimkubwa,’ she said, holding out the pan. ‘There’s
blood – dark blood.’
Bi Asha turned her face to the wall, evidently not
surprised.
‘Bimkubwa, you must go to the hospital,’ Afiya said.
With her face still turned away, she shook her head
and then shivered all over in a fit of trembling. Afiya
told Khalifa who went without further hesitation to fetch
the Indian doctor, but he was not able to come until
the following morning because he had been called away.
The doctor was a short plump man in his fifties,
silver-haired and mild-mannered. He was dressed in a
white shirt and khaki trousers like a government man.
He asked Khalifa to leave the room and Afiya to remain.
At first he asked questions and looked to Afiya to
corroborate the replies. All the defiance had gone out of
Bi Asha and she answered him in a defeated voice but
without reluctance. How long had she seen blood in her
urine? What did she have for breakfast, for lunch? Was
she able to keep food down? Where did it hurt most?
Did she know if any relative had suffered similar pains in
the past, her mother or her father? Then he examined
the places in her side where it hurt most. Afterwards he
told Khalifa and Afiya that at first he thought the blood
in the urine was bilharzia in the bladder, but it was
more likely that her kidneys were failing. The kidney
failure could itself be the result of untreated bilharzia, so
she would have to go to the hospital to be tested for
that. It was possible, though, that matters were even
worse than that because he felt a lump in her side that
might well be something dangerous. They should not
have waited so long.
She was X-rayed at the hospital and found to have an
advanced growth in her left kidney and a smaller one in
her bladder. She also had the bilharzia worm but it was
quite certain that the growths were advanced and very
likely malignant. The Indian doctor told them that the
hospital had asked her to return for further X-rays in
case there were more growths, but he said it was up
to her to decide. There was no treatment possible for
the growths they found but he was able to give her
medication for the bilharzia. To Khalifa he said it would
now be a matter of a few months only and the best he
was able to offer was pain-killing injections. Khalifa
thought it was right to tell her so she could prepare
herself and her affairs. He told her that the doctor
offered to give her pain-killing injections if she wished,
and he could not help smiling as he told her that.
Doctor Sindano, he said. He wondered, without saying
anything to Bi Asha but voicing the thought to Afiya, if
now was the moment to reconcile his wife with her
nephew Nassor Biashara, undeserving though he was. It
was not right to leave such rancour behind. He did not
say this to Bi Asha because the news she had received
was already too much for her. He had not thought she
would go before him. She was always so strong.
Afiya went round to see Khalida, Nassor Biashara’s
wife, to tell her about Bi Asha’s illness. She was heavily
pregnant now, nearing the end of her term, and the
stairs in their house exhausted her. ‘Baba asked me to
tell you this,’ Afiya told her, making it clear that the
information was also an implied invitation to visit the
dying relative.
Khalida came to the house for the first time that
afternoon. She kissed Bi Asha’s hand as she lay in her
bed and sat on a stool beside her, making the kind of
conversation people did by a sickbed. It was a low-key
reconciliation, and neither Khalida nor Bi Asha made any
drama out of it. After about an hour Khalida wished her
better health and left. Bi Asha heaved a great sigh after
she left, as if at the end of an ordeal. All resistance
went out of her as she lingered with them in her last
days. She drifted in and out of delirium, muttering
incomprehensibly, sometimes in tears.
14
Afiya delivered her child at home, attended by the
midwife who had had a hand in the arrival of scores of
other babies in the town. Like many others, Afiya
preferred to go into labour in the presence of women
she knew than to suffer the attentions of complete
strangers, so despite the administration’s Maternity Health
campaign she did not go to the new clinic for the birth.
The midwife was sent for as soon as her waters broke,
as was Jamila who had promised to be with her during
the birth. Her labour started in late afternoon and went
on through the night and into the late morning of the
next day. Hamza was sent to the room used to receive
guests, where Khalifa also took refuge. No one slept
much during that tense time. They left the doors open
so they could hear Bi Asha, and Khalifa was up and
down to her as she called out for him, groaning with
weariness. The backyard door also stood open and the
dying woman’s groans mingled with Afiya’s intermittent
gasps of pain. Hamza sat on the back doorstep for a
while in case help was needed and because he felt so
useless sitting inside. When the midwife came out and
saw him there she chased him away. It will be a long
night yet, she said, and it was not seemly for the
husband to be sitting so expectantly by. He did not
know what was unseemly about it but he obeyed and
returned to the guest room.
A neighbour came in the morning to look after Bi Asha
so Khalifa could go to work, and the women persuaded
Hamza to go too. There was nothing for him to do and
they would send for him when there was news. He
went reluctantly, feeling bullied by the women when he
wanted to be nearby while Afiya was in pain, and within
reach when the Forthcoming arrived. No call came
throughout the morning and he could hardly keep his
mind on the work. Khalifa appeared at the workshop
just after the noon call to prayers, anxious for different
reasons to be back, and they went home together. It
was the good neighbour looking after Bi Asha who told
them that Afiya had given birth to a boy. Hamza found
her lying in bed, exhausted but triumphant, while Jamila
stood grinning nearby and the midwife silently went
about her work.
‘We were just cleaning up before sending for you,’
Jamila said.
They called the baby Ilyas. That was decided before
his arrival, Ilyas if it is a boy, Rukiya if it is a girl.
After the birth, Bi Asha appeared to fall into a deep
doze, not quite fully asleep but not awake either. She
did not take any food and did not seem to wake when
the neighbour or Khalifa rolled her over to remove the
towelling they wrapped around her middle as a nappy.
Her breathing was deep and laboured but she no longer
made the weary groans of recent days. On the third
day after the birth, Jamila prepared lunch for the
household and then went back to her own family. She
said she would come again the next morning. Afiya was
already on her feet and she resumed her household
chores while the baby napped. Later that afternoon,
without coming awake once since the baby’s arrival, Bi
Asha passed away in unaccustomed silence.
For the next few days they were engaged in the
obligatory observances of her passing, and it was only
after they were over that the household began to
assume its new shape without Bi Asha. In public, Khalifa
wore the sombre face of a mourning husband out of
respect for Bi Asha, and even at home some puff
seemed to have gone out of him although they had
known for months that she was passing away.
‘It is so final, that is what is surprising, what I did not
properly understand,’ he said, ‘that this person is gone
forever.’ He looked at Hamza and then could not resist
a touch of mischief. ‘Unless you believe the fairy story
that all the dead will one day come back to life?’
‘Shush, Baba, not now,’ Afiya said.
‘Well, we have to make some changes anyway,’ he
said. ‘We can’t have the two of you and the little one
in that store room in the yard while I live like a lord
inside an empty house. So this is what I suggest now.
You two move inside and take the two adjoining rooms,
and I’ll move out into the yard. You will need the space
and I would like some fresh air. What do you think?
We’ll get some new furniture for the other room so you
can sit there and receive your guests, and the little
prince can play and invite his guests.’
Afiya suggested that they punch a hole through into
the front store room and make that part of the interior
of the house, then they could still keep the guest room
for visitors or if someone came to stay. Who would that
be? The words remained unspoken but they all knew
she meant in case of the elder Ilyas’s return. They
debated these suggestions for a while before deciding
what best to do while Hamza reminded both of them
that it was not their house and they had better talk to
Nassor Biashara before knocking down any walls. It is
now indisputably Nassor Biashara’s house and he might
well want us to leave, he said. Khalifa waved this away,
He wouldn’t dare, he said.
Despite his level-headed practical manner, though,
something seemed to have gone out of Khalifa. He went
to the warehouse in the morning and grumbled about
the waste of time every day. He sat with his friends on
the porch in the evenings and spoke his outrage with
more restraint than he used to, and even tutted at
Topasi when his gossip became too fanciful when before
he would gleefully have elaborated on it. To Afiya and
Hamza he said he needed to make new plans, do
something more useful than sit on a bench outside a
warehouse for the rest of his life. There are all these
schools the government is opening up, perhaps I can
become a teacher, he said.
Nassor Biashara also had new plans. Building works on
the new workshop were under way and new machines
were on order. ‘It will take some months for the
workshop to be ready,’ he said to Hamza. ‘And when
it’s ready I want you to run it. When the machinery
comes, I will arrange for someone to come from Dar es
Salaam to train you. Mzee Sulemani will continue in the
other workshop making our regular items. In the
meantime, we will need to find a new carpenter to work
with him on the sofa and armchair line … maybe young
Sefu is ready, what do you think? Or how about your
friend Abu? He is a carpenter, isn’t he? I think he just
does odd jobs for people at the moment. Ask him if he
wants a regular job working for me. You will also need
an assistant to work with you, someone properly trained,
maybe more than one if we get going. Perhaps that’s a
better job for Sefu. He’s young, he’ll learn quickly.’
‘Abu will come with me, he’ll learn just as quickly as I
will. Sefu already works with Mzee and knows what’s
required there,’ Hamza said.
‘As you wish,’ Nassor Biashara said.
‘Pay rise?’ Hamza suggested.
‘I will increase your pay. In fact, I will double it once
you start the new workshop. Find yourself somewhere
to rent and get away from that miserable house.’
‘What about Khalifa?’
‘He can find somewhere to rent too,’ Nassor Biashara
said.
‘Are you trying to get him out of the house?’
‘I would love to do that. I could get a good rent for
that property,’ he said.
‘Rent it to me then,’ Hamza said.
Nassor Biashara laughed in surprise. ‘You are a
sentimental fool,’ he said. ‘Why do you want to worry
about that old grumbler?’
‘Because he is Afiya’s Baba,’ Hamza said.
‘I’ll think about it,’ Nassor Biashara said. ‘What makes
you think you’ll be able to afford it?’
‘You are a good businessman. You’ll not want to make
your new workshop manager miserable by charging him
an unreasonable rent.’
‘You’re turning into a conniving little manipulator! First
you charm that old grumbler so that he takes you into
his house, then you seduce his daughter and bamboozle
the old carpenter with your German translations, and
now you are trying to blackmail me,’ Nassor Biashara
said. ‘I told you, I’ll think about it.’
*
The construction of the new workshop progressed at
speed. Nassor Biashara was as excited about his new
plans as he had been by the arrival of the propeller a
few years before. This will be another brilliant idea, he
said, and even Khalifa did not mock. Mzee Sulemani
looked on indulgently and turned his attention to training
their young apprentice to take over when Hamza was
no longer available to him. After the gleaming equipment
arrived and was connected to electric power, an Indian
machinist and carpenter arrived from Dar es Salaam to
train Hamza and Abu. His father’s company was the
importer and distributor of the machinery and also the
owner of a sawmill and a transport company. He
demonstrated for Hamza and Abu over three days with
Nassor Biashara hovering in the background. After three
days and repeated test runs with the saws and the
grinders and the frets, the Indian machinist made ready
to go, promising to return when required and certainly
at the end of the year for a service check. Take your
time. Don’t take any risks with the machinery, he said.
Nassor Biashara expected this new partnership to grow
and for the sawmill to be the supplier of timber for the
new enterprise, and he showered the young man with
thanks and goodwill.
These were contented years for Afiya and Hamza.
Their child was well, learned to walk and to speak and
seemed to have no blemish. When he was still a baby,
Hamza took him to the hospital for the recommended
vaccinations and watched diligently over his health. Child
deaths were not uncommon but many of the illnesses
that took them away were avoidable, as he knew from
his time in the schutztruppe which took good care of
the health of the askari. In the year of Ilyas’s birth, the
British were in the early stages of the mandate awarded
to them by the League of Nations to administer the old
Deutsch-Ostafrika and prepare it for independence.
Although not everyone noticed at the time, that last
clause was the beginning of the end for European
empires, none of which had dreamed hitherto of
preparing anyone for independence. The British colonial
administration took the mandate responsibility seriously
rather than just going through the motions or worse.
Perhaps it was just a lucky confluence of responsible
administrators, or it was the compliance of the people
who were exhausted after the rule of the Germans and
their wars and the starvation and diseases which
followed, and were now willing to obey without defiance
so long as they were left in peace. The British
administrators had no fear of guerillas or bandits in this
territory and could get on with the business of colonial
administration without resistance from the colonised.
Education and public health became their priorities. They
made a big effort to inform people about health issues,
to train medical assistants and open dispensaries in
far-flung parts of the colony. They distributed information
leaflets and conducted tours by medical teams to instruct
people on malaria prevention and good childcare. Afiya
and Hamza listened to this new information and did
what they could to protect themselves and their child.
They also made some changes to the house. With
Nassor Biashara’s permission, they punched a doorway
in the wall of the old store room and made that part of
their bedroom, which was now large and airy with
windows looking out over the street. When Ilyas was old
enough to get about, he had the run of all the rooms
and the yard and even Khalifa’s room. Khalifa loved him
to totter in there and climb up on the bed with him.
One of Hamza and Afiya’s sadnesses was their failure
to provide Ilyas with a brother or sister. Twice in the
next five years Afiya was pregnant and then miscarried
in the third month. They learned to live with this
disappointment because everything else was going so
well, or that was what Hamza said to Afiya when she
was made sad by her failure to keep another
pregnancy. Another disappointment was the continuing
silence about the elder Ilyas. There was still no word
from or about him. It was now six years since the end
of the war and it caused Afiya much anguish that she
could not decide whether to give up hope and grieve or
keep thinking of him as alive and on his way home.
After all, she lost him for nearly ten years once before
and then he turned up like a miracle.
‘Everything is going well,’ Hamza insisted. The new
workshop was a success and in his prosperity Nassor
Biashara was generous to them. ‘I’ll ask Maalim Abdalla
to make enquiries again.’
Maalim Abdalla was now headmaster of a large school
and had good contacts with the British administrative
office through his friend in the District Officer’s staff. He
offered Khalifa a job as a primary school teacher of
English but he was still dithering, not really sure if he
wanted the bother of disrespectful twelve-year-olds. He
was kept pleasantly busy in the warehouse with the
growing prosperity of the business, and so much at
ease in the new arrangement at home with his room in
the yard that his contentment was evident in his
appearance. He was not really sure if he wanted to
start a new profession at his age. He was busy being a
grandfather. He always had a little something for Ilyas:
the sweetest banana in the market, a segment of ripe
red-fleshed guava, a flapjack. Where is my grandson?
he called as he came in. In their favourite game Ilyas
sometimes hid while Khalifa pretended to look for him
although his hiding places were often easy to guess.
He was a handsome slim boy, and it became evident
as he grew up that he was drawn to silence. His
silences did not seem troubled although Afiya was not
always sure and wondered if there was a sorrow in him
he did not yet know how to speak. Hamza shrugged
and did not say that sorrow was impossible to avoid. At
times Ilyas sat in the same room as he did while
Hamza lay stretched out on a mat and neither of them
spoke for long periods. It seemed to Hamza that this
silence was a place in which his son found refuge.
When he was five years old the world economy went
into a great Depression, not that he knew much of it.
Ilyas grew up in these years of austerity when Nassor
Biashara’s affairs once again went into decline, and
everything in everyday life became scarce and
expensive. Government plans for new hospitals and
schools were abandoned, and workers were laid off and
went hungry in towns and villages and on the land. It
seemed that bad times never left them for long. Nassor
Biashara did not lay off any of his workers but he
reduced their wages and quietly reopened the smuggling
business he had run during the war, buying supplies
from Pemba and bringing them in without paying
customs duties and then selling on at inflated prices.
They all had to live.
With time on his hands, Khalifa began to teach Ilyas to
read. You’ll be going to school soon, so might as well
get started now, he said. Ilyas listened open-mouthed to
Khalifa’s stories, which he mixed in with reading and
writing exercises to keep the boy interested. Once upon
a time, he would begin, and Ilyas’s eyes would lighten
and his mouth slowly slacken as he was drawn into the
tale.
‘A monkey lived on a palm tree by the sea.’
It was a story Ilyas knew but he did not smile or grin
in recognition, only his eyes softened in expectation.
‘A shark swam past in the water nearby and they
became friends. The shark told the monkey stories of
the world he lived in across the water in Sharkland,
about its luminous landscape and happy population. He
told him about his family and friends and the
celebrations they held at certain times of the year. The
monkey said how wonderful his world sounded, and how
he wished he could see it, but he could not swim and if
he tried to get there he would drown. It’s all right, the
shark said, you can ride on my back. Just hold on to
my fin and you’ll be quite safe. So the monkey climbed
down from the tree and sat on the shark’s back. The
journey across the water to …’
‘Sharkland!’ Ilyas filled the gap Khalifa left for him.
‘The journey to Sharkland was so exhilarating that the
monkey exclaimed, You’re such a good friend to do this
for me. It made the shark feel bad and he said, I have
a confession to make. I am taking you to Sharkland
because our king is ill and the doctor said that only a
monkey’s heart will make him better. So that’s why I’m
taking you there. Without any hesitation the monkey
said, Why didn’t you tell me?’
‘I didn’t bring my heart with me,’ Ilyas declared,
grinning with delight as he supplied the line.
‘Oh, no, the shark said. What shall we do now? The
monkey said, Take me back and I’ll fetch it from the
tree. So the shark took the monkey back to the tree
on the shore, and he rushed up the palm and the
shark never saw him again. Don’t you think that was a
clever little monkey?’
Ilyas did not remember much of his early days at
school, but later his teachers praised him for his neat
work and his obedient manner. They sometimes pointed
him out to others as an example: Look at Ilyas, why
can’t the rest of you sit quietly and get on with your
sums. Despite that, the other children did not persecute
him or take much notice of him. He stood by and
watched the boisterous play of the other boys, and at
times was dragged in to take part if an extra body was
needed to make up a team.
He suffered his small share of the unavoidable
indignities of childhood. Once he misjudged his need to
urinate and underestimated the distance from classroom
to toilet. On another occasion he was found to have
picked up lice from another boy in the class and had to
have his head shaved. On his way home one day he
stubbed his toe on a protruding rock and as he fell a
piece of broken bottle cut into his calf. When he
reached home his foot was covered in blood and Afiya
wept at the sight of his injury. She strapped his calf
and walked him to the hospital where his eyes roved
over the hospital grounds while they waited outside the
clinic, returning again and again to the casuarinas
swaying so elegantly in the breeze.
One day he got lost. He went with his father to watch
a boat race at the waterfront. The boats were coming
into the finishing line and Hamza was craning his neck
for a glimpse of the outcome when he realised that
Ilyas was no longer beside him. He rushed in all
directions looking for him but could not see him. In the
end, frantic now that he had lost their precious little
boy, he hurried home in the hope that someone who
knew the child had found him wandering the streets and
had taken him there, but he was not home either. So
he headed for the Government Hospital to see if by
chance his son had been injured and he found him
sitting silently under the serene casuarinas, watching
them sway elegantly in the breeze. Hamza sat beside
him and breathed in deeply a few times to calm himself.
‘Is there something wrong with him?’ Afiya asked
Hamza, who shook his head emphatically.
‘He forgets himself sometimes, that’s all,’ he said. ‘He’s
a dreamer.’
‘Like his father,’ Afiya said.
‘He looks like his mother to me.’
‘Do you think he looks like my brother Ilyas?’
He shook his head. ‘I don’t know, having never met
the elder Ilyas.’
‘No,’ she said. ‘Our Ilyas is much more handsome. I’ll
ask Baba.’
Her lost brother was never far from her thoughts and
Hamza sometimes wondered if it had been a mistake to
name the boy after him, if that made the absent one
ever-present and refreshed the anguish of his loss. The
memory of him more often than not made Afiya sad
although at times she remembered the happy times she
had spent with him. After they spoke of him she
sometimes fell silent in a way he was beginning to
recognise and it took a while for her to extricate herself
from such recollections.
‘I wish we knew what happened to him,’ she said. ‘I
wish I knew how to find out for sure, but I don’t. You
are the one who has travelled and worked everywhere
and fought wars in many lands. Sometimes when I hear
you talk about the people and places you saw, it makes
me bitter that I have been penned here all my life.’
‘Don’t be unhappy. It’s not as you imagine out there,’
he said, holding her while she shed gentle tears in the
dark.
He asked Maalim Abdalla once again if there was any
news from his friends in the British administration and he
said no. No one was interested in a missing askari.
There were so many unaccounted dead that it was
impossible to get information on an individual. The
number is not even known, hundreds of thousands of
them most likely, among them carriers on both sides
and civilians in the south who starved or died from the
influenza epidemic. Among the askari also many died
from diseases. It is a long time now since his sister lost
touch with him, the maalim said. I fear it can only mean
one thing.
Afiya heard from Khalifa about a campaign to recruit
young mothers to train as midwife assistants. The new
maternity clinic was a big success, although expectant
mothers only went for the antenatal events and most of
them refused to deliver there. They wanted to recruit
more midwife assistants to provide a comprehensive
service, including visiting mothers at home. The
candidates were required to be literate enough to write
basic notes and read simple manuals, and to be fluent
in Kiswahili. It was thought their experience of childbirth
would benefit other expectant mothers to whom they
would also be able to communicate with nuance rather
than just issuing instructions and prohibitions. When she
told Hamza he was enthusiastic. You fit all the
requirements, he said. There is such a need for it, and
you yourself will learn new skills.
*
Ilyas was eleven years old when the whispers started.
He was used to playing alone, he was an only child.
Maybe his temperament inclined him that way anyway,
his contented silences, as they seemed to Hamza. In his
games he made a variety of blameless objects play
major roles in his stories: a matchbox became a house,
a small pebble was the British warship he saw in the
harbour, a discarded thread-spool was the locomotive
that growled into the centre of the town. As he
manoeuvred these objects he told their stories in an
intimate voice only audible to him and his playthings.
Early one evening, just as it was turning dusk, Hamza
came home from an afternoon stroll by the sea. That
was his routine, a late-afternoon walk by the sea and
then directly to the mosque for the maghrib prayer. On
this occasion he was a little early so he decided to go
home first. He was on his way to the washroom in the
backyard to perform his ablutions before heading to the
mosque when he saw Ilyas sitting on a stool near the
side wall, facing away from the doorway. He did not
seem to notice Hamza’s arrival. He was speaking in an
unfamiliar whisper, his face lifted, not narrating a story
or pretending to be a house or a rabbit but apparently
addressing someone tall standing before him. Hamza
must have made a noise or his presence might have
disturbed the air because Ilyas looked round quickly and
stopped speaking.
Perhaps, Hamza thought afterwards, he was
memorising a poem or a passage from his English class.
His teacher was fond of that method of learning, making
his pupils copy the poems into their exercise books,
learn them by heart and then recite them while he
corrected their pronunciation and awarded marks. It was
a frugal and pleasant use of the teacher’s time. He
preferred his pupils should think of the poems as
something they would treasure for life – or that was
what he told them whenever there were signs of
rebellion. Some of his choices surprised Hamza when he
read them. He was not familiar with them or with
English poems in general but they seemed to him
demanding or even incomprehensible material for children
of his son’s age. Hamza himself had only a modest
grasp of English but knew he was a more fluent reader
than Ilyas. He was not sure what any eleven-year-old
would make of ‘The Psalm of Life’, or ‘The Solitary
Reaper’. On the other hand, the pastor had thought
Schiller and Heine were too much for him but Hamza
had found something in them in his own way. So after
he saw Ilyas whispering in that way for the first time
and had time to reflect on the sight, he guessed the
boy was practising a recitation for class.
He came home again at the same time the next
evening but Ilyas was out somewhere and not in the
backyard speaking strangely. Hamza checked that for a
few days just to be sure. Their sleeping arrangement
was that Afiya and he slept in the old front store room,
which now had a door to the bedroom once occupied
by Bi Asha and Khalifa. Ilyas slept in the inner room,
which also had a desk made for him by his father
where he could do his schoolwork. The door between
the two rooms was rarely closed although a curtain
hung in the doorway to give the parents privacy when
they wished it. Hamza stood beside the doorway some
nights, listening intently for Ilyas’s whispers, but heard
nothing. He did this for several nights in a row until he
was sure that what he had heard that evening at dusk
was the boy practising a recitation.
Khalifa was now approaching sixty and spoke of himself
as a man on his last legs. He did wobble a little at
times, when he made a sudden turn or rose to his feet
after sitting cross-legged for a long time, but it still
provoked Afiya when he said that. She told him not to
wish misfortune on himself or one of these days his
wish might be granted. It also provoked Maalim Abdalla,
who was now an eminent officer in the Education
Department, a school inspector and no longer a teacher.
He liked to tell Khalifa that he would not talk about
being on his last legs if he had a proper job to do
instead of secreting smuggled goods in a warehouse.
They were still there on the porch most evenings,
Khalifa, Maalim Abdalla and Topasi, giggling over racy
gossip, catching up with the world and exposing its
endless excesses. Hamza sat with them for a while at
times, and sometimes brought them their tray of coffee
as he used to, sharing that duty with Ilyas, but he liked
to spend part of the evening inside, sitting in the guest
room listening to Afiya talk about her day at the clinic
and browsing through the old newspapers that Khalifa
and Maalim Abdalla passed on to them. Several new
ones had appeared in recent years: in Kiswahili, in
English and even in German for the settlers who chose
to remain after the war. Ilyas sometimes sat with them,
listening or reading, but he was usually the first to go to
bed.
‘There’s something here about pensions and back-pay
for the schutztruppe,’ Hamza said, reading in the
German newspaper one night. ‘It says there is a
campaign to persuade the German government to
resume paying pensions now that its economy is coming
out of the Depression. You remember, they stopped
them a few years ago.’
‘No, I don’t,’ Afiya said. ‘Did you ever receive any
money?’
‘You had to produce a certificate of discharge. I didn’t
have one of those. I was a deserter,’ Hamza said.
‘Will my brother Ilyas receive a pension? Maybe we
can find him like that.’
‘If he’s still alive.’ Hamza regretted the words as soon
as he said them. Afiya put her hand to her mouth as if
to stop herself from speaking, and he saw her eyes
suddenly brimming. She had spoken about the possibility
before and it was he who had asked her not to give
up hope. Now it was he who spoke abruptly about his
passing.
‘It makes me feel so bad that we don’t know,’ she
said in a broken voice.
‘I’m sorry …’ he began but she hushed him and
glanced towards Ilyas who was still in the room, his
eyes large with hurt and fixed on his mother.
‘Anyway, you were not a deserter, you were injured,
slashed by a maddened German officer. Does it not say
anything there about a pension for the injured?’ she
asked.
He understood that she was making conversation to
distract Ilyas, so did not say that the pastor had told
him that in the German Imperial army he would have
been court-martialled and shot for running away and
discarding his uniform. He did not know if that was true
or if it was the pastor once again cutting him down to
size. He was in no state to run when he left his
company and it was the pastor himself who had
ordered the uniform to be burned, for fear that the
British would send him and his family to a detention
camp for giving aid to a schutztruppe. Hamza did not
want their pension anyway. ‘It says that the General is
still working hard for his troops in Berlin, so maybe
everybody will get their pension,’ he said. ‘The settlers
here love the General.’
During school holidays and on days when Afiya was at
the midwife clinic, Ilyas came to the timber yard with his
father. Sometimes he stayed all morning, at others he
wandered off on his own for a while and then returned
when he was ready to go home. Mzee Sulemani
greeted the boy with smiles and let him do small jobs in
the workshop. He even taught him how to embroider a
cap. When Idris was in full flow with his filthy talk he
had a captive audience in Ilyas now as well as Dubu,
and it seemed at times that he exerted himself to even
lower depths to entertain the boy. Nassor Biashara, who
still worked from his small office despite his prosperity,
was often forced to intervene and silence his
foul-mouthed driver. You’re poisoning the boy’s mind
with your dirty talk. Ilyas grinned at the drama and
waited for more. On their way home for lunch they
went to the market to buy fruit and salad, and some
afternoons after work the boy joined Hamza on his walk
by the sea for a while before heading back to the
house. They did not talk much, that was not their way,
but sometimes Ilyas held his father’s hand as they
walked.
After the baraza on the porch concluded, Khalifa
usually locked the front door and went to his room in
the backyard. On his way to bed he sometimes stopped
for a word if they were still up but often he went by
with just a wave. One evening he said Hamza’s name
as he walked past but did not stop. Afiya and Hamza
looked at each other in surprise at his abrupt tone of
voice. She mouthed, What have you done? He shrugged
and they shared a smile. He hooked a thumb towards
the porch. Perhaps they bickered over something out
there. Better go and find out.
Hamza found Khalifa sitting cross-legged on his bed,
and he lowered himself carefully as he always had to at
the foot, so that they faced each other.
‘I wanted to have a word with you on your own after
what Topasi just told me,’ Khalifa said. ‘It’s all right but
I wanted to have a word first to see what you know.
It’s about the boy, about Ilyas. People are talking about
him. He walks long distances into the countryside on his
own. People find it strange that a twelve-year-old town
boy should walk for miles into the countryside on his
own.’
‘He likes walking,’ Hamza said after a moment, smiling
but also troubled that the boy was the subject of
discussion in this way. ‘He often walks with me while I
limp along. Maybe he likes to stretch his legs properly at
times.’
Khalifa shook his head. ‘He talks to himself as he
walks. He walks along the wide country paths talking to
himself.’
‘What! What does he say?’
Khalifa shook his head again. ‘He stops talking when
someone comes near. No one has heard what he says.
You know that for many people that is a sign of …’ He
paused, unable to say the word, his face puckered with
repugnance for the imputation.
‘Maybe he is reciting the poems his teacher sets them
at school. I’ve heard him do that. Or maybe he is
making up a story. He likes to do that. I’ll tell him to
be careful.’
Khalifa nodded then shook his head yet again, his eyes
turning to Afiya who stood just inside the room. He
waved her in and waited while she closed the door.
‘You have not told him,’ he said, and she shook her
head. ‘Two days ago I was resting here late in the
afternoon,’ said Khalifa, addressing Hamza and lowering
his voice to a whisper. ‘I am not usually here at that
time of day, as you know. The window into the yard
was open but the door to this room was closed. I
heard someone talking, very close, an unfamiliar voice, a
woman’s voice. I could not hear the words but the tone
was grieving. I thought for a moment that it was her,
Afiya, but then instantly I knew it was not. It was not
her voice. I thought it was a guest with a sad tale
talking to her, then I remembered I had heard Afiya
calling out to Ilyas as she left the house a short while
before. It was alarming. Someone was in the house
unannounced.
‘I got up from the bed to have a look but I must
have made a noise because the voice immediately
stopped. I opened the curtain and there he was, Ilyas,
sitting on a stool by the wall. He was surprised, not
expecting me to be there. Who was talking to you? I
asked him. No one, he said. I heard a woman’s voice, I
said. He looked puzzled and then shrugged. I don’t
know. What are you smiling at?’
That last question was addressed to Hamza who said,
‘I can just picture it. That is his favourite reply to any
question he does not want to answer. I don’t know …
what are you so worried about, Baba? He must have
been pretending to be a grieving a woman in a story
he was making up.’
Khalifa shook his head emphatically, beginning to show
signs of impatience. ‘I spoke to Afiya when she came
back. I told her about the unfamiliar voice I had heard.
You weren’t there, Hamza. It was a strange old voice,
grieving and complaining at the same time. I saw as
soon as I began that she knew about this voice. Tell
him.’
Hamza was now on his feet, leaning against the
bedpost, facing Afiya. ‘I have heard him,’ she said,
coming closer, keeping her voice down. ‘He has always
done this, playing those games where he speaks all the
parts. Two times now I have heard him speaking in the
way Baba describes, a grieving voice, here in the
backyard. He did not see me standing at the door and
I waited because I did not want to shock him or make
him feel bad. I thought it was like sleepwalking and I
should let him wake up when he was ready. One night
when you were sleeping, I heard a noise from his room
and found him wincing and turning and moaning in that
voice.’
‘Something is troubling that child,’ Khalifa said.
Hamza turned to him with a look of rage on his face
but he did not speak for a moment. He knew they
were waiting for him. ‘Maybe he was having a bad
dream. Maybe he has a rich imagination. Why are you
talking about him like this, as if he is … unwell?’
‘He walks on country roads talking to himself,’ Khalifa
said, raising his voice in irritation. Afiya instantly hushed
him but he was not finished. ‘People are talking about
him, and it is they who will make him unwell if we don’t
find help for him. Something is bothering that child.’
‘I will talk to him,’ Hamza said with a note of finality.
He glanced at Afiya and began to move towards the
door.
Don’t panic him, she said when they were alone.
I know how to speak to my son, he said.
Only he was not sure how to speak to him about this,
and days passed without him doing so, withstanding
Khalifa’s questioning glances with a deadpan expression.
There were no further reports of Ilyas’s strange
whispers for a few days and Hamza was tempted by
the thought that perhaps the episode was over and
they were safe. Then on Saturday, when Hamza was
heading to the music club, Ilyas asked if he could come
too. The club belonged to the players he had first heard
several years ago. By now they were an orchestra and
they gave a free performance to a small audience on
Saturdays. They only played for an hour and were
finished by five o’clock, then continued their rehearsals
behind closed doors. They walked home by the sea and
because Hamza had relished the music and was
warmed by the absorbed silence of Ilyas beside him,
which made him think that he too had relished it, they
stopped when they saw an empty bench at the
waterfront and sat down to look out to sea as the sun
set behind them. Hamza tried to think of an opening
that would allow him to approach the subject of voices.
He tried and rejected several before eventually he said,
‘Do you have schoolwork to do this weekend?’
‘I have to revise for an algebra test on Monday.’
‘Algebra? That sounds complicated. I never went to
school, you know, so I didn’t learn any algebra.’
‘Yes, I know. This is not really difficult, we are only
doing very simple algebra at the moment,’ Ilyas said. ‘I
expect it will get very difficult later.’
‘No poems to learn then? Hasn’t your English teacher
given you any to learn this week?’
‘No, he makes us recite the same ones again and
again,’ Ilyas said.
‘Is that what you recite when you take your long
walks in the country? The poems?’ Ilyas turned to look
at Hamza as if he was waiting for his father to explain.
Hamza smiled to show that this was not a rebuke. ‘I’ve
heard about your long walks and how you say things
aloud. Are you reciting those poems?’
‘Sometimes,’ Ilyas said. ‘Is it wrong?’
‘No, but some people think it’s strange. They say
you’re talking to yourself. So when you practise your
poems or you’re making up a story, it’s better to do it
at home or at school. You don’t want ignorant people to
say you’re crazy, do you?’
Ilyas shook his head and looked defeated. Just at that
moment the burning disc of the sun dipped below the
town’s skyline behind them and Hamza was able to
change the subject. In a few moments it was dusk and
they were on their way home.
*
The Italians invaded Abyssinia in October 1935 and
brought talk of war back into their midst. They captured
Addis Ababa in May 1936 and alarmed the British
enough to begin a recruiting drive over the next two
years for their colonial army, the King’s African Rifles,
which they had largely disbanded during the austerities
of the Depression. Not only was the administration
concerned about Italian intentions towards their colonies,
they were worried about the German remnant in the old
Deutsch-Ostafrika, which they expected to be anti-British
and pro-Hitler. They also feared that Italian violence
against Abyssinian resistance, which included chemical
weapons used against civilians, would stir up the Somali
and Oromo and Galla people who had not fully
reconciled themselves to British rule on the northern
frontier. War and rumours of war filled the newspapers.
Ilyas’s whispering malaise, which so alarmed his mother
and Khalifa, subsided for several months after that
conversation with Hamza by the sea. They were relieved
that it had turned out to be no more than a brief
episode of childish behaviour. Then talk of war and
recruitment of an army brought the whispering back.
Afiya found her son slumped on the floor beside his bed
late one evening, his hands over his ears.
‘What is it? Is your head hurting?’ she asked, kneeling
beside him. She saw there were tears running down his
face. He was thirteen now and it was an unusual sight
to see tears on his face.
He shook his head. ‘It’s the voice,’ he said.
‘What voice? What voice?’ Afiya said in alarm, knowing
they were back in trouble again when she had thought
they were safe.
‘It’s the woman. I can’t make her stop.’
‘What is she saying?’ Afiya asked but Ilyas shook his
head and said no more. He sobbed in gentle gasps and
seemed unlikely to stop, so in the end Afiya helped him
to his feet and made him lie on his bed. To her relief
he was very soon asleep, or pretending to be. When
she asked him the next morning if he was all right, he
said curtly that he was well. Is the woman still there?
she asked but he shook his head and went off to
school.
It was only a brief respite. Another episode occurred a
few days later when they woke in the middle of the
night to hear his cries. He was calling out his name,
Ilyas, Ilyas, but in a woman’s voice. Hamza climbed into
bed with him and held him in his arms while he
struggled. When he calmed after what seemed like
hours, Hamza asked him, ‘What does she want?’
‘Where is Ilyas?’ the boy said. ‘She says, where is
Ilyas? Again and again.’
‘You are Ilyas,’ Hamza said.
‘No,’ he said.
Khalifa said to Afiya, ‘He is asking for your brother
Ilyas. I knew it was a mistake to call him that. All this
war talk has brought it back. Maybe he is blaming
himself. Or you. Maybe that’s why he speaks in a
woman’s voice. He is speaking for you. There is no one
here who can help him. If you take him to the hospital
they will ship him to an asylum a hundred miles from
here and put him in chains. We have to look after him
ourselves.’
After that the voice came every night asking for Ilyas.
‘We have to do something,’ Afiya said. ‘Jamila thinks
maybe we should see if the hakim can help him.’
‘She grew up in the country,’ Khalifa said mockingly,
addressing Hamza. ‘They believe in all that witches and
devils business. You’re a religious man so maybe you
might also see if the hakim can give you a little powder
to chase the demons away.’
‘Why not?’ Hamza said although he had no faith in
that kind of religion. So Afiya once again visited the
hakim as she had when Bi Asha was unwell and came
back with a gilded plate with verses from the Koran
written on it. She ran some water on the plate to
dissolve the words and made Ilyas drink it. The signs
did not abate even after repeated doses of dissolved
holy words. Now Ilyas no longer left the house. He was
losing weight and sleeping long hours in the day
because his nights were disturbed. Afiya was distraught
and grew increasingly desperate. One night, as Ilyas lay
gently moaning his name, she said aloud and in agony,
Oh my God, I can’t bear this torture. It was after that
night she decided to call a shekhiya whose name was
given to her by the mganga neighbour who had come
to see to Bi Asha in her last days.
‘What will she do?’ Hamza asked.
‘If he has been visited the shekhiya will tell us.’
‘Visited by what? I told you, she grew up in the
country. We’re going to do witchcraft in our house,’
Khalifa said, going to his room in disgust.
The shekhiya entered the house in a cloud of incense,
so it seemed. She was a small pale-complexioned
woman with a sharp-edged handsome face. She greeted
Afiya brightly and began talking cheerfully as she took
off her buibui, which released another cloud of incense
and perfume, and then she settled herself down on the
mat in the guest room. ‘That sun is fierce out there. I
stopped to rest wherever I found some shade but look
at me, I’m covered in sweat. It makes you long for the
kaskazi to arrive and bring us a breeze. So, my child,
are you well, and is your household well? Alhamdulillah.
Yes, I know, your loved one is troubled otherwise you
would not have called me. Haya, bismillahi.Tell me what
has been troubling him.’
The shekhiya listened with eyes cast down as Afiya
described the episodes and the voices, her fingers toying
with a brownstone rosary. She wore a red shawl of
flimsy material and a loose white shift that covered all of
her. Only her face and hands were exposed. The
shekhiya did not ask any questions while Afiya spoke
but raised her head now and then as if struck by a
detail. Afiya circled the events back and forth, not sure
if she had managed to convey the force of what she
was describing, until in the end she began to feel that
she was rambling and stopped.
‘He calls out the name Ilyas, which is his name as well
your brother’s who did not come back from the last
war. You don’t know if he is lost or still living and
stranded somewhere. His father was also in the war but
came back,’ the shekhiya said, and waited for Afiya to
confirm. ‘I will now see the boy.’
Afiya called out and Ilyas came in, looking frail and a
little nervous. The shekhiya smiled brightly and patted
the mat beside her for him to sit down. She gazed at
him for a moment, still smiling, but did not ask him any
questions. She closed her eyes for what seemed a long
time, her face solemn and composed, and once she
raised her hands, palms outwards, but did not touch
him. Then she opened her eyes and smiled again at
Ilyas, who shuddered. ‘Haya, you go and rest now,’ she
said. ‘Let me speak alone with your mother.
‘There is no doubt that your son has been visited,’ the
shekhiya said. ‘A spirit has mounted him. Do you
understand what I am talking about? It is a woman and
that makes me hopeful. Women visitors talk, the males
sometimes just blunder about angrily. She speaks to him
– that too makes me hopeful. From what you have told
me she has not hurt him and from feeling the boy here
beside me, I don’t think the visitor means him harm but
we have to find out what she wants and what will
placate her and then provide that if it is possible. If you
are willing, I will bring my people here and we will purify
the boy here in this room and listen to what his visitor
demands. The ceremony will not be cheap.’
*
Several people came to know of the coming ceremony
and none but Khalifa mocked as Hamza had feared
they would. Mzee Sulemani asked about Ilyas but did
not say anything about the ceremony. Hamza did not
imagine that the old carpenter would approve. I will pray
for his health, he said. Nassor Biashara knew the details
from his wife who had heard about them from Afiya
herself. He too asked after Ilyas and said with a shrug,
Might as well try everything. Hamza knew that they now
had no choice but to go through with the ceremony
even though he himself had deep doubts about it. He
had heard about it in the schutztruppe where there
were regular ceremonies in the boma village every week
among the Nubi families, but he knew that Afiya had
become distraught and frightened about it, had driven
herself frantic with anxiety. She was making herself ill.
He did not argue or scoff about the ceremony as
Khalifa did. He had his own guilty idea that it was his
trauma which was the source of what was tormenting
his son, an aftermath of something he had done during
the war. He could not think what it could be so there
was no logic to this sense that it was something in his
past which generated the evil air. Then there was the
lost Ilyas. They had named their son after him and
somehow established a connection between them, made
the boy bear the tragedy of Afiya’s loss, share in her
guilt that their efforts to locate her brother or discover
his fate had failed.
The Frau’s address was in the copy of Heine’s Zur
Geschichte der Religion und Philosophie in Deutschland .
When the pastor saw Hamza with it, he said, ‘What are
you doing with that book?’
‘The Frau lent it to me,’ he said.
‘She lent you Heine!’ The memory of his shocked
surprise still made Hamza smile with glee even after all
these years. ‘And what have you made of it so far?’
the pastor asked.
‘I am making very slow progress,’ Hamza said humbly,
knowing how it provoked the pastor when the Frau
praised his ability to read German, ‘but I was interested
to learn that there was a time in Germany when men
made the sign of the cross when they heard the
nightingale sing. They took her for an agent of evil, as
they did everything that gave pleasure.’
‘That is exactly what I would’ve expected of an
ignorant reader,’ the pastor said. ‘You can only
understand the frivolous in Heine while his deeper
thought escapes you.’
When the pastor decided to return to Germany and
Hamza made ready to leave too, the Frau gave the
book to him and wrote her name and address on the
title page. It was an address in Berlin. Write and tell me
when something good happens to you, she said. Hamza
had thought of writing to her before to ask if there was
a way of finding out about Ilyas from the records in
Germany. He was discouraged by the audacity of the
idea. Why would she bother to find out? How would she
know about the records of the schutztruppe askari?
Who cared what happened to a lost schutztruppe? In
addition, he was discouraged by his own lack of a
return postal address. Recently the Biashara Furniture
and General Merchandise Company had acquired a post
office box so now that problem was solved. He
composed a brief letter to the Frau, reminding her of
who he was and explaining his search for his
brother-in-law. Did she know how they could find out
what had happened to him? He copied the letter on to
a sheet of the company’s headed paper, addressed an
air-mail envelope and took it to the Post Office on the
same day. That was in November 1938.
*
After the isha prayer on the evening of the appointed
day, soon after Hamza sent off his letter, the shekhiya
arrived at the house with her entourage. She was
dressed in black from head to toe and her eyelids and
lips were kohled. Her woman singer and the two male
drummers were dressed more casually in ordinary
clothes. She closed the window and lit two scented
candles. She then sprayed the room with rose water
and started the incense burners, one of ud and the
other of frankincense. She waited until the room was
filled with scent and fumes before she summoned Ilyas
and Afiya and asked them to sit against the wall. No
one else was to come in although she did not close the
door to the room. She sat cross-legged in front of Ilyas
and Afiya with eyes closed. Then the drummers began,
beating a gentle rhythm while the woman singer
hummed.
Hamza sat on his own in their bedroom, the door
open in case he was required. He remembered that the
ceremonies lasted a long time and sometimes became
loud and disorderly and people were hurt. Khalifa sat on
the porch with his friends and tried to ignore the
drumming and the singing. More people walked past
than usual that evening, curious for a glimpse of what
was going on, but they were disappointed. Both the
front door and the window were closed, so all they saw
were three elderly men sitting on the porch pretending
that nothing unusual was happening inside.
The drumming went on for an hour, for two hours,
monotonous and getting louder. The singer raised her
pitch but her words were as incomprehensible as before,
if they were words at all. The shekhiya was reciting
prayers but they were inaudible in the din and rhythm
of the drums. She kept the incense burner fuming,
adding coals from a pot she kept beside her. At some
point during the second hour, Afiya’s head dropped and
Ilyas’s followed a few moments later. She began to
mutter and after a while that became a word: Yallah.
Yallah. By the third hour both Afiya and Ilyas were
rocking back and forth in a trance as was the shekhiya.
Suddenly Ilyas fell over on to his side and Afiya
screamed. The drummers and the singer took no notice,
nor did the shekhiya stop speaking her prayers.
By this time Khalifa had shut up the house and was
sitting on the bed in his room, Hamza beside him,
waiting for the drama to come to an end. Just before
midnight, the drumming stopped and the two men
approached the room. They saw Ilyas lying on his side
on the floor while Afiya was leaning against the wall, her
eyes wide open in exaltation. Without turning around, the
shekhiya waved the two men into the room while the
drummers and the singer rose wearily and went into the
yard to eat the food they had asked to be prepared for
them.
The shekhiya then told them, ‘The visitor lives in this
house. She was already here when the boy was born.
Someone died soon after he was born, and the visitor
left that one and mounted the boy. She is waiting for
Ilyas and in her anguish she will trouble the boy. There
will be no cure until you find him or find out about him,
only then will the visitor learn to live with the affliction of
his absence and stop tormenting the boy. Until you
have that knowledge you will have to call me whenever
the boy suffers a crisis and we will perform another
ceremony to placate the visitor. She does not mean to
harm the boy. She is in anguish herself. She wants to
see Ilyas.’
After that the shekhiya collected her fee and the gifts
she had requested and at that late hour left the house
with her entourage, leaving a perfumed silence behind
her.
Hamza helped the exhausted Ilyas to his feet and to
their bed in case he needed attention in the night. I will
sleep in the boy’s bed, he said. He went back to check
that all was well and saw Khalifa standing in the
doorway of the guest room.
‘What nonsense! All the perfume and drumming and
stupid wailing!’ he said. ‘That woman knows a source of
income when she spots one. She has worked out what
Afiya wants to hear: Find your brother. The story about
a love-besotted devil is the kind of rubbish even Topasi
will not believe. Anyway, maybe that will calm the boy
down and settle his nightmares or whatever they are.
The only bit that made sense was that thing about the
devil being in Asha all along. That comes as no surprise
to me.’
*
The shekhiya ceremony took place a few weeks before
the arrival of the kaskazi with its dry steady winds, just
before the beginning of the school year. There were no
further episodes of voices during those weeks and the
boy gradually lost the tense expectant look that was
characteristic of him at the time. He was subdued and
withdrawn at first but his manner was obliging and
affectionate. It seemed that the treatment had done
enough to rid him of the voices and the fear they
induced in him, at least for the time being. Khalifa said it
was because the old witch had terrified the boy and
that had made him give up his whispering nonsense.
Afiya kept an anxious eye on her son, secretly fearful
that the treatment could not possibly have been a cure.
His school had a new headmaster at the beginning of
that year. He was also Ilyas’s English teacher and he
did not ask his students to memorise poems. Instead he
had a zeal for handwriting and for writing in general.
They had a writing exercise in every class, painstakingly
copying out in their best hand the short passages the
teacher wrote out on the blackboard. No more of those
lazy tedious lessons when one boy after another stood
up to recite the same poem while the teacher sat
contentedly at his desk. They had to write a story to a
given title for homework every week, to be collected by
the class captain first thing on Monday mornings. Ilyas
took to this new regime with a passion. With the
teacher’s encouragement, his stories grew longer with
every new attempt, and were written in a careful hand
that the teacher showered with praise. Over the months
of that year, his stories featured monkeys, feral cats,
encounters with strangers on country roads, a cruel
German officer who ran berserk with a sword and even
a story about a fifteen-hundred-year-old jinn who lived
in the neighbourhood and visited a fourteen-year-old
boy. He wrote his stories with dedication and
unmistakable pleasure, sitting at the desk Hamza had
moved to the guest room so his son could work
undisturbed. Ilyas sat there for hours, writing in his
note-taking book first before copying the finished product
into his homework book on the Sunday night. They all
read his stories: Afiya, Hamza and Khalifa. When he
was especially pleased with one he sometimes asked to
read it aloud to them.
‘That boy has a rich imagination,’ Khalifa said
admiringly. ‘It’s such a relief that he has taken up
writing instead of whispering.’
‘Like I said, maybe that is what he was doing all
along,’ Hamza said smugly. ‘Making up stories.’
Afiya looked doubtfully at both of them. Had they really
already forgotten that blood-curdling voice, the tears and
the pain-wracked cries in the middle of the night? Was
that just stories waiting to be told? To her it had
seemed like torture. She did not think she could bear
the endless drumming and those incense fumes of the
shekhiya and her entourage again. For now the boy
seemed excited and confident in his new
accomplishments, but she remained fearful of a
recurrence of the monstrous voice.
15
One mid-morning in March the following year a
policeman on a bicycle rode up to the Biashara Furniture
and General Merchandise timber yard. It was raining
lightly, hardly spotting his khaki, the end of the vuli
rains, the short rains. The policeman was of medium
height, with a thin mild-looking face and a small nervous
twitch around his left eye. He leaned his bicycle under
cover and entered Nassor Biashara’s office.
‘Salam alaikum,’ he said politely.
‘Waalaikum salam,’ Nassor Biashara replied, leaning
back, his spectacles on his forehead, suspicious. There
was never a good reason to be visited by a policeman.
‘Is Hamza Askari here?’ he asked in a voice as mild
as his appearance.
‘There is a Hamza here but his name is not Askari,’
Nassor Biashara said. ‘He was one a long time ago.
What do you want with him?’
‘That must be him. Where is he?’
‘What do you want with him?’ Nassor Biashara asked
again.
‘Bwana mkubwa, I have work to do and so do you. I
don’t want to waste your time. He is wanted at HQ and
I have to take him there,’ the policeman said politely,
even smiling. ‘Kwa hisani yako, please call him for me.’
Nassor Biashara rose to his feet and led him off to the
workshop where the policeman informed Hamza that he
was to follow him to Police HQ at once. What has he
done? Nassor Biashara asked, but the policeman took
no notice, facing Hamza and pointing to the door with
his left arm outstretched.
‘What is this about?’ Hamza asked.
‘It’s not my business, let’s go. I am sure you will soon
find out,’ the policeman said.
‘You can’t come here and arrest a man and not even
tell him what it is about,’ Nassor Biashara protested.
‘Bwana, I have work to do. I am not here to arrest
him, but I will if he does not come with me willingly,’
the policeman said, his right hand reaching for the
handcuffs hooked to his belt.
Hamza raised his hands placatingly. They walked
through the streets, Hamza slightly in front, the
policeman wheeling his bicycle just behind. They drew
glances but no one addressed them. At Police HQ
another officer wrote Hamza’s name in a book and
pointed to a bench where he was to wait. He tried to
guess what this summons was about. The policeman
had asked if he was Hamza Askari so it was something
to do with the schutztruppe. He never called himself
Askari. Were they going to detain him after all these
years? There were rumours that some of the German
settlers in the country were making ready to leave. The
growing talk of war between the British and the
Germans raised fears of the detention of enemy aliens.
After what felt like an hour but was probably less, he
was called and taken down a short corridor to an office.
A European policeman with thinning hair, bristling
moustache and glittering eyes was sitting behind a desk.
He was not in police uniform but was dressed in a
white short-sleeved shirt, khaki shorts, white stockings
and polished brown shoes, the uniform of a British
colonial official. Another policeman in khaki uniform but
without his hat was sitting at a small desk near him,
ready to take notes. The British officer pointed to a
chair without speaking. He waited while Hamza settled
down and then waited a moment longer.
‘Is your name Hamza?’ he asked in Kiswahili, his voice
rasping and menacing, seeming to come out of the
corner of his mouth. There was a brief and unexpected
glint of amusement in his eyes, then he repeated the
question in a gentler voice. ‘Hamza?’
He thought he recognised a contained violence in that
tone that he had heard so often from the German
officers. He had not had much to do with British officials
and this police officer was the first one he was meeting
in this town. ‘Yes, I am Hamza,’ he said.
‘Hamza, can you read?’ the British officer asked,
speaking again in that rasping voice.
‘Yes,’ he said in surprise.
‘In German?’ the British officer asked.
Hamza nodded.
‘Who do you know in Germany?’ the police officer
asked.
‘I don’t know anyone,’ Hamza said, and remembered
the Frau even as he made this denial.
The police officer held up an envelope. It had been
opened. ‘This is addressed to Hamza Askari, using the
Post Office Box number of Biashara Furniture and
General Merchandise. Is this you?’
She had replied! He stood up and reached out for the
letter. The uniformed policeman also stood up.
‘Sit down,’ the British officer said firmly, looking from
one man to the other.
‘It’s my letter,’ Hamza said, not sitting.
‘Sit down,’ the officer said more mildly, and waited until
Hamza sat. ‘How do you know this woman?’ he asked,
speaking her name.
Yes, she replied! ‘I worked for her many years ago,’
he said, and the officer nodded. There could be nothing
irregular about a native working for a European. The
officer took out the letter and seemed to read it
through silently.
‘It’s my letter. Why are you keeping it from me?’
Hamza demanded loudly.
‘For security reasons. Don’t raise your voice at me or
you will not see this letter, ever,’ the officer said in
fluent German. ‘Why would a respectable German
woman write to you and how is it that someone like
you can read a letter written in such sophisticated
language? What other letters have you exchanged with
her?’
‘I have not received a letter from anyone in my whole
life,’ Hamza replied in Kiswahili, understanding now why
the police officer was interested in his letter. ‘We have
been waiting for news of my brother for many years.
He was an askari. I know a little German so in the end
wrote to the Frau to ask for her help. Does it say his
name in that letter?’
The officer held out the letter and Hamza stood up to
take it. ‘Tell me what it says,’ the officer said.
Hamza read it silently through, and then read the
letter again. It was a long letter, two pages, and he
took his time, making a pretence of struggling to
understand it all. ‘It says he is alive and in Germany,’
he said. ‘Alhamdulillah, she managed to find out.
Someone who helped the Frau found his name
mentioned twice in the office dealing with askari records,
in 1929 when he applied for his pension and 1934
when he applied for a medal. So he’s alive,
alhamdulillah, but she does not know any more. She
says she will keep asking. It’s unbelievable. She says
my letter took a long time to reach her because they
have moved but it did, and then she had to get in
touch with …’
‘That’s enough,’ the British officer said, cutting off his
babble. ‘I have read the letter. What is all this about a
book by Heine? Have you read this book?’
‘Oh, no, madam gave it to me,’ Hamza said. ‘It was a
joke, I think. She knew it was too difficult for me. I lost
it many years ago.’
The British officer considered this for a moment and
then decided to let it go. ‘Affairs with Germany are very
tense at the moment. If there are further exchanges
with anyone living there we will investigate and may
withhold correspondence. There could be consequences
for you. Be aware that we will keep a close watch on
you and on this address from now on. You may go.’
Hamza pocketed the envelope and strolled back to the
timber yard, relishing the anticipation of how he would
break the news to Afiya later. They crowded around him
when he returned to the yard and he made light of it,
saying he was questioned by a British officer about his
time in the schutztruppe. He wanted to keep the news
of the letter for Afiya first. ‘They must be checking up
on old askari,’ he said, ‘to recruit them for the KAR. I
told them I was injured so that was that.’
He waited for them to come home for lunch. Khalifa
no longer worked at the warehouse, spending his
mornings at home or dropping in at one café or
another to share the news of the day, and then he
went to the market for fruit and vegetables as
instructed by Afiya, who worked at the maternity clinic in
the mornings. Ilyas was back from school when she
came home to prepare their lunch. They did not usually
eat until two in the afternoon. Hamza waited until after
lunch, eating the matoke and fish with silent relish, then
he washed his hands and called for attention.
‘What are you up to?’ Afiya said, smiling. ‘I knew
there was something.’
Hamza pulled the envelope out of his shirt pocket and
they all knew at once what it was. None of them ever
received any letters. He read it to them, simultaneously
translating as he did.
Dear Hamza, It was such a lovely surprise to receive
your letter. It was such a long time ago and we often
talk about our time in Ostafrika and the mission. I am
glad to hear you are well and that you are now a
carpenter and a married man.
Your letter took a long time to reach us because we
no longer live in Berlin but now live in Würzburg, so it
had to be forwarded to us. We were very sorry to
hear about your brother-in-law and started enquiries
immediately. It is very fortunate that a friend of ours
works in the Foreign Affairs Office in Berlin and he found
two references to Ilyas Hassan in the schutztruppe
records, which are held in that Office, so your relative is
here in Germany. Such a striking name, I think there
could only have been one Ilyas Hassan in the whole of
the schutztruppe. The first reference to the name was in
1929 when he applied to receive his pension, and the
second was in 1934 when he applied to receive the
campaign medal for the Ostafrika campaign. He made
both these applications in Hamburg so it is likely that he
is living there. Many foreign people do because they
work on the ships, so maybe that is his work too. He
was unsuccessful with the pension application because he
did not have discharge papers. He was also unsuccessful
with the application for a medal because it was only
awarded to Germans and not to askari.
These recent years have been difficult years for
Germany, and as a foreigner I expect that life has not
been easy for your brother-in-law, but at least you
know now that he is alive. Our friend was not able to
find out when he came here and where he was before
that. I expect there is more information available and we
will make further enquiries. We will let you know if we
learn any more, and will give him your address when
we find him. It would be so very good if you were able
to be in touch again.
By the way, when our mail was forwarded from the
mission, there was a letter from the Oberleutnant, your
old officer who brought you to us. He wrote to us after
he was repatriated to Germany in 1920 when we
ourselves were already here. It seems he was detained
first in Dar es Salaam and then Alexandria. He asked
after you and I was able to write to him and tell him
that you made a full recovery and your German had
progressed in leaps and bounds, and that you were a
devoted reader of Schiller. The pastor sends his regards
and would like to know how you got on with Heine.
That is how he remembers you, not as the man whose
leg and perhaps his life he saved, but as the askari
who presumed to read his Heine. That was his copy I
gave you. Please accept our best wishes to you and
your family.
*
They never received another letter. Hamza replied to
thank the Frau but perhaps the letter did not leave the
country. If it did and she replied with more news,
perhaps her letter did not get past the watchful police
officer. In September that year war was declared
between the United Kingdom and Germany and that
was the end of postal services between the two
countries. In the town they were very distant from this
war and only knew about it as news for a while,
despite the deployment of KAR through Tanga towards
the campaign against the Italians in Abyssinia. Khalifa did
not survive the war. He passed away quietly one night
in 1942 at the age of sixty-eight. When his body was
taken in the bier for the funeral prayers, it was the first
time he had entered a mosque in decades. He left
nothing for anybody apart from a few rags and a pile
of old newspapers.
Ilyas finished Standard VIII in 1940 but there was no
further schooling available in the town, and Standard VIII
was achievement enough in many people’s eyes. It was
good enough for training as an officer of some kind in a
government department, health or agriculture or
customs. Ilyas enlisted in the KAR in December 1942
soon after Khalifa’s passing and a few months after the
defeat of the Italians in Abyssinia. He was in his
nineteenth year. He had been talking about joining up
for more than a year but Khalifa so vociferously
opposed this move that Ilyas did not dare disobey. This
is nothing to do with you, he said to Ilyas. Isn’t it
enough that your father and your uncle were stupid
enough to risk their lives for these vainglorious
warmongers?
After Khalifa’s passing, Ilyas wore his parents down
with his pleas. The British administration promised to
send qualified veteran KARs for further studies at the
end of the war and Ilyas could not resist the lure. He
was sent to Gilgil in the highlands in Kenya Colony for
training and then was posted to Dar es Salaam for
garrison duties with the coastal regiment for the rest of
the war. He did not take part in any fighting but he
learned a great deal about the British and their pursuits.
He also learned to ride a motorcycle and drive a Jeep,
and even to tinker successfully with its engine. He
played football and tennis and went fishing with a
speargun and flippers. For a while he even smoked a
pipe.
At the end of the war, the promised further studies
became training as a school teacher in Dar es Salaam
and afterwards Ilyas found work in a school in the city
and rented a room in Kariako Street. These were the
years when new stirrings of anti-colonial sentiment were
spreading, informed by the successful campaign in India
and the triumph of Nkrumah in the Gold Coast and the
defeat of the Dutch in Indonesia. Students politicised by
their university experiences in the African Association in
Makerere University College and by their involvement in
student organisations in England and Scotland, were
active in this movement. They and everyone else who
knew about it were alarmed by the settler leanings of
the new colonial administration. Ilyas was not yet drawn
into these activities although he would be later. In these
years, when he was in his late twenties, he played
sports and taught school, and as time passed he began
making a name for himself writing stories in Kiswahili,
which were sometimes published in the newspapers. In
the 1950s the colonial administration introduced a new
radio service. It aired news and music programmes and
features on improvements in health, agriculture and
education. The news soon became strident accounts of
Mau Mau atrocities in Kenya, which were so persuasive
that mothers threatened their children’s misbehaviour
with the appearance of the rebels.
For a few days every vacation, Ilyas went to see
Hamza and Afiya. Parts of the town now had an electric
supply, including their old house. He strolled the streets
with some pleasure but he soon became restless and
longed to return to the city. His parents loved his stories
from there, asking to hear details of his classroom
achievements and the success of his publications in the
newspapers. Afiya gasped with amazement at his
sporting exploits, exaggerating her surprise, which
flattered Ilyas and made him feel proud that he had
prevailed against his timidity as a youth. He asked about
his uncle Ilyas, if they had any more news. He always
asked, not expecting any. His father told him that he
had written again to the Frau pastor but received no
reply. Stories of the wartime destruction in Germany
were only slowly reaching them, and he was fearful that
the Frau and the pastor might not have survived.
Hamza was by now in his fifties, slowing but content
and well, managing the Biashara timber yard for Nassor
who was now no longer a businessman but a magnate
with a variety of trading outlets – pharmaceutical
companies, furniture stores and most recently electrical
products, including radios. Hamza and Afiya owned one.
A popular feature on the radio service was a story
programme that invited contributions from listeners. The
assistant to the producer of the programme drew his
boss’s attention to one of Ilyas’s stories. The producer
asked to meet him. He was a big genial Englishman with
a large face and a coppery moustache. He was dressed
in the colonial uniform of white shirt, khaki shorts, white
calf-length socks and brown shoes. The exposed parts
of his arms and legs were muscular and covered with
coppery hair, just like his face.
‘My name is Butterworth and I am on secondment
from the Department of Agriculture,’ he told Ilyas. ‘I am
not an expert on either radio or stories. They might as
well have sent me to the National Authority for
Anchorages and Tunnels but you have to muck in and
get on with it. Now I know I like stories to have some
element of instruction to them. This one here about the
experiences of a school teacher will do very well. Can
you do another with something about farming in it?’
Mr Butterworth was also a reserve KAR officer and
when he learned that Ilyas was a veteran, he found
ways of showing favour to him. That was how he was
given the opportunity to read his own stories on the
radio and become a minor celebrity. Mr Butterworth was
relieved of his secondment in the mid-1950s and was
transferred to the West Indies but by then Ilyas was in
and making his own way in his new profession. In time
he came to be a full-time member of the production
team of the broadcasting service, working mainly in the
newsroom and writing stories when he found the time.
The mid-1950s were the years of TANU’s march to
independence under the leadership of Julius Nyerere, the
mission- school boy who had at one time considered
ordination into the Catholic Church before he became a
radical activist for Independence. By the elections of
1958, it was evident that the British colonial
administration was in disarray and on the retreat. The
elections of 1960, held under the supervision of the
colonial administration, gave TANU and Nyerere 98 per
cent of the elected members of Parliament. These were
not results produced out of a hat by a corrupt electoral
commission but ones achieved under the grumbling
surveillance of reluctant colonial officials. There was no
way to argue against that and by the next year the
British were gone.
In 1963, two years after Independence, which both his
parents lived to see, Ilyas was awarded a scholarship by
the Federal Republic of Germany to spend a year in
Bonn learning advanced broadcasting techniques. He was
thirty-eight years old. The Federal Republic of Germany
was what was popularly known as West Germany, a
federation of the regions occupied by the US, the British
and the French after the war. The part of Germany
occupied by the Soviet Union became the German
Democratic Republic. The GDR was highly active in
colonial politics, and along with other Soviet East
European allies provided sanctuary, training and arms to
insurrectionist liberation movements in many parts of
Africa. It had positioned itself as the champion of
decolonising nations, and the Federal Republic
scholarships were gifts intended to match those of the
German Democratic Republic and to win support from
poor nations at forums like the United Nations. Ilyas was
interviewed and assessed and was delighted to be
awarded the scholarship. He had never travelled
anywhere, apart from those months in Gilgil where he
did his basic training. Now he was travelling as a
mature man with his eyes open and curious.
He spent the first six months in Bonn in an intensive
course in German language. He enjoyed his time there,
attending every class, practising for hours, walking the
streets every day to see whatever there was to see,
wandering into shops and exhibitions, sending postcards
to his parents and friends at work. He lived in a
three-storey building that provided accommodation for
mature students. There were six large rooms with
shared bathroom facilities on each floor. It was not far
from the university cafeteria and was altogether
comfortable and suited to Ilyas’s needs. It seemed he
must have inherited something from his father because
he made rapid progress in German, and his teachers
praised him for his competence in it.
At the end of the first six months he began the
broadcasting part of the program. As part of it, he was
expected to work on a journalistic project requiring
research and recorded interviews. He was given a
budget and six hours of consultation time with a
supervisor for technical assistance. He knew about this
before he came and already knew what his subject
would be. He chose to work on the whereabouts of his
uncle Ilyas. He had copied the Frau pastor’s address
from his father’s volume of Heine, and while he was still
on the language course began reading about Würzburg.
He learned that 90 per cent of the city was destroyed
in an air raid on 16 March 1945 by hundreds of British
Lancaster bombers dropping incendiary explosives. There
was no pressing military imperative behind the raid,
which was intended purely to demoralise the civilian
population. He found a contemporary map of the
reconstructed town in the university library and searched
for the street named in the Frau’s address. The details
of the wholesale destruction made him doubtful that it
would still be there, but it was. When his German was
good enough, he wrote a note explaining that he was
the son of Hamza the askari and wished to extend his
father’s greetings to the pastor and Frau. He wrote his
address on the left-hand corner of the envelope. Ten
days later his letter came back unopened with Nicht
bekannt unter dieser Adresse written across the bottom
of the envelope. Not known at this address.
His assigned supervisor, Dr Köhler, frowned as Ilyas
began to describe his project. ‘A war in Africa fifty years
ago,’ he said. ‘Germany gets no rest from her wars.’
Dr Köhler was in his early forties, tall and fair-haired, a
striding smiling presence in the department, and Ilyas
was disappointed by his disapproval. He waited for a
moment before continuing and then explained that the
schutztruppe he was trying to trace was his uncle who
had come to Germany after the war in Ostafrika. Dr
Köhler lifted his chin and then gave a small nod for him
to continue. Ilyas explained about the pastor who had
saved his father’s leg and perhaps his life, and the
mission in Kilemba, and the letter from the Frau pastor
about his uncle. He told Dr Köhler about the letter he
had written to the Würzburg address and that it was
returned. Dr Köhler shrugged. Ilyas thought he
understood what that shrug meant.
‘A pastor means he is a Lutheran,’ Dr Köhler said. ‘A
Lutheran minister in Catholic Würzburg should not be too
difficult to trace. How do you intend to proceed?’
‘I was planning to go there to see if there are any
records about the street or anything about the pastor
or the Frau.’
‘The sooner the better,’ Dr Köhler said with a glimmer
of enthusiasm. ‘Where will you look for these records?’
‘I don’t know. I’ll enquire when I get there,’ Ilyas said.
Dr Köhler smiled. ‘If I were you, I would begin at the
Rathaus. As you know, you can claim your travel and
subsistence expenses for trips associated with your
project but only afterwards. Our bureaucracy is very
thorough about funds … oh, about everything. German
bureaucracy is the envy of the world. I hope you have
enough money to spend and then claim. This is your
project and you proceed as you wish, but I would like
us to meet like this once a week for you to give me a
report. Yes, go and check the Rathaus in Würzburg. It
was a lovely town but I have not been there since the
war.’
Ilyas took the train from Bonn to Frankfurt and
changed there for Würzburg. At the Rathaus he was
directed to the Civil Registration Office where he found
out that the street the pastor and his family lived in was
completely destroyed and the pastor, the Frau pastor
and a daughter were presumed dead in the fire that
followed the raid. There were two daughters, he
remembered, but one was evidently no longer living with
her parents then. That was all the record held in that
office contained, their names, the street they lived in
and its destruction. The woman in the office explained
that if the person he was looking for was a Lutheran
pastor, then he should check the Lutheran archive for
Bavaria in Nuremberg.
He reported his findings to Dr Köhler who advised him
to make a phone call to the archive before going there.
In the meantime, he showed him a Compact Cassette
recorder released by Phillips only a few months before.
The department had acquired two of them, he said, and
why did Ilyas not take one with him in case he was
able to record a conversation with the archivist? He
made his phone call and took another trip to Bavaria,
travelling through Frankfurt and Würzburg again. He had
not known how close he was to Nuremberg on his
previous trip. The archivist was a lean elderly man in a
dark suit, which was a little loose on him. He took Ilyas
into a room with a long table on which he saw a small
stack of papers. The archivist sat at one end of the
table with some papers of his own, presumably to keep
an eye on him. If you need any assistance, please do
not hesitate to ask, he said.
Ilyas read in the papers that after his return from
Ostafrika, the pastor was attached to the Evangelical
Lutheran Church of St Stephan in Würzburg. The church
was totally destroyed in March 1945 and rebuilt in the
1950s. He also taught part-time at the
Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg. He taught a
course in Protestant Theology. The Frau’s occupation
was not recorded. Both had perished with their younger
daughter in the bombing raid. Do you know what
happened to the other daughter? Ilyas asked the
archivist who shook his head but did not speak. Among
the papers was a brief cutting from a newspaper or
magazine about the mission in Kilemba, just a couple of
paragraphs about a clinic and a school and the pastor’s
name. There was no photograph and the title and date
of the publication had been cut off. Ilyas asked the
archivist if he knew the source of the cutting.
He came over to where Ilyas was sitting and looked at
the cutting for a moment. He said, ‘Most likely Kolonie
und Heimat , the old one before it was taken over by
the Reichskolonialbund.’
‘What is that?’ Ilyas asked.
The archivist looked stern, almost contemptuous of his
ignorance. ‘It was the bund, the Gleichschaltung for the
recolonising movement. There was a campaign to get
back the colonies taken away by Versailles.’
‘What is that word? Gleichschaltung?’ Ilyas asked.
‘Please, I would be very grateful for your help.’
The archivist nodded, perhaps mollified by his manner
of asking. ‘It refers to the way the Nazi government
brought organisations together under one administration.
It means … coordination, control. The Reichskolonialbund
brought together all the recolonising associations and put
them under the control of the party.’
‘I knew nothing about a recolonising movement,’ Ilyas
said.
The archivist shrugged. Dummkopf. ‘They revived
Kolonie und Heimat , which was a publication from
Imperial times. I think this cutting is from the old one,’
he said, and returned to his place at the table while
Ilyas wrote up his notes. It was then that he realised
he had forgotten to switch on the Phillips Compact
Cassette recorder. He did not think he could ask the
stern man to repeat what he had said about the
Reichskolonialbund. As he was taking his leave, it
suddenly occurred to Ilyas to ask, Were you in
Ostafrika? They were standing at the outside door when
he asked and the archivist said yes and turned away
before Ilyas could ask any more.
Dr Köhler was also surprised to hear that Ilyas had
not heard of the recolonising movement. ‘It was a big
thing, a real grudge for the National Socialists to exploit.
I remember the marches. Did you use the Compact
Cassette? Oh, that’s a pity. You are making a radio
programme so it would be good to have some clips
from someone like the archivist. Maybe on your next
search.’
Ilyas found out that the archives of the
Reichskolonialbund were in Koblenz, not at all far from
Bonn, a beautiful old city at the junction of the Rhine
and Moselle rivers. He rang ahead with his request to
look at the Kolonie und Heimat archive and was met by
a woman archivist who led him to a large room with
lines of shelving stacks. She said her office was next
door if he needed her. In the archives he found out
that the Reichskolonialbund was established in 1933 and
incorporated into the National Socialist Party in 1936.
Kolonie und Heimat was revived in 1937 and was as
much a magazine as a photo-journal. As he searched
the copies he saw many photographs of colonial
homesteads and ceremonies, taken before the loss of
the colonies, but also photographs of events that were
organised by the Reichskolonialbund to campaign and
agitate for the return of the colonies. In the rallies and
on platforms, members wore the uniform of the
schutztruppe and carried a specially designed flag. In a
November 1938 issue he saw a grainy photograph of a
group standing on a stage, two adult Germans in
uniform, a German teenager in a white shirt and black
shorts, standing before a microphone, and behind him
and to the left of the frame, an African man in
schutztruppe uniform. Behind them was the flag of the
Reichskolonialbund, a corner of which displayed the
swastika. The caption to the photograph described it as
the Hamburg Reichskolonialbund Gala but did not name
the four figures. He asked the archivist if it was possible
to find the original photograph or any details of the
source or occasion. This time he remembered to switch
on his Phillips Compact Cassette.
‘We have many of the original photographs but I am
not sure where they are exactly or if they are properly
classified,’ she said apologetically. ‘I have some deadlines
to meet, but if you give me a few days I will get back
to you. I have the telephone number of your
department at the university.’
A few days later he was back in Koblenz and, with the
Cassette running, the archivist helped him go through
the boxes of photographs which were collected by year.
They found the original photograph with ease. On the
back of it was a label with the name of the
photographer and those of the figures in it, which the
picture editor must have decided to leave out of the
caption. The label also said that the event was a rally
after the screening of a film about a Deutsch-Ostafrikan
community, shown in Hamburg. The African man in
schutztruppe uniform was named as Elias Essen. Those
eyes, that brow.
He asked the archivist for a copy of the original and
sent it to his mother. She replied in a few days to say
it was his uncle Ilyas.
He was in Bonn and lived within walking distance of
government offices, including the Foreign Affairs Office,
and his accreditation as both a student on a
broadcasting program funded by a Federal Government
scholarship and a journalist by profession gave him
access to many officials. Even when they were not able
to supply him with the information he required, they
were often able advise on where he should be looking.
He wrote home to let his parents know about the
progress of his search, but some of his finds were too
inconclusive to announce in a letter.
He made trips to Freiburg to the Institute of Military
History, to Berlin to the archives of the Colonial
Association, to the Institute of Oriental Languages in
Berlin to meet linguists and search their archives for the
language training of policemen and administrators who
were to run the regained colonies. Some of the
researches were to consolidate the information he had
already gathered, some to provide more context and
background. He met military enthusiasts, amateur and
professional historians, his Phillips Compact Cassette
recorder running whenever the person he was speaking
to allowed it, and gradually he was able to assemble a
sketch, a story, which still required lengthier and more
determined research to fill out in detail, but was quite
adequate enough for his radio project. Dr Köhler was
delighted with the effort and thought that the
poor-quality sound the Compact Cassette produced
somehow enhanced the emotional power of the
proceedings.
He waited until he returned home before telling his
parents the full story of what happened to Uncle Ilyas.
This was what he told them. Uncle Ilyas was wounded
at the Battle of Mahiwa in October 1917. (I was there,
Hamza said. It was a terrible battle.) He was taken
prisoner and held in detention first in Lindi and then in
Mombasa. (So he was only a day away from us here,
Afiya said.) After the war, the British repatriated the
German officers to Germany but released the
schutztruppe askari any old how, just let them out and
allowed them to look after themselves as best they
could. Ilyas was not sure where or when Uncle Ilyas
was released. He could not find out anything about that.
He might have ended up anywhere on the coast or
even across the ocean. Nor was he sure what kind of
work he did after his release. At some point he worked
on ships as a waiter or a general servant of some kind.
For sure he worked on a German ship and was in
Germany in 1929 as they knew from the Frau’s letter
and from what Ilyas saw in the Foreign Affairs Office
record. By this time he had changed his name to Elias
Essen and was making a living as a singer in Hamburg.
He was remembered as Elias Essen, a performer in
low-life Hamburg cabarets who wore the military uniform
of an askari on-stage, including the tarbush with the
Imperial eagle badge. He married a German woman in
1933 and had three children. Ilyas knew that because
one of the entries on his record was the appeal his wife
made against eviction from their rented property, and
she provided details of her marriage and the birth of
her children and her husband’s record as a veteran of
the schutztruppe. Another entry was his application for a
campaign medal in 1934, but they knew about that
already because the Frau had told them. What they
didn’t know, because the Frau did not know it either,
was that Uncle Ilyas was marching with the
Reichskolonialbund, a Nazi Party organisation. The Nazis
wanted the colonies back, and Uncle Ilyas wanted the
Germans back, so he appeared on their marches
carrying the schutztruppe flag and on platforms singing
Nazi songs. So while you were grieving for him here,
Ilyas said, Uncle Ilyas was dancing and singing in
German cities and waving the schutztruppe flag in
marches demanding the return of the colonies.
Lebensraum did not only mean the Ukraine and Poland
to them. The Nazi dream also included the hills and
valleys and plains at the foot of that snow-capped
mountain in Africa.
In 1938 Uncle Ilyas was living in Berlin, and perhaps
just as the Frau was making her enquiries on their
behalf, he was arrested for breaking the Nazi race laws
and defiling an Aryan woman. Not for marrying his
German wife! That marriage took place in 1933 and the
race laws were not passed until 1935 so could not be
applied to them. It was for an affair he had with
another German woman in 1938. That is what the rule
of law means. He broke the law fair and square in
1938 but he did not in 1933 because the race law was
not yet passed. Uncle Ilyas was sent to Sachsenhausen
concentration camp outside Berlin and his one surviving
son, who was called Paul after the General in the
Ostafrika war, voluntarily followed him there. It is not
known what happened to his wife. Both Uncle Ilyas and
his son Paul died in Sachsenhausen in 1942. The cause
of Uncle Ilyas’s death is not recorded but from the
memoir of an inmate who survived, it is known that the
son of the black singer who voluntarily entered the
camp to be with his father was shot trying to escape.
So what we can know for sure, Ilyas told his parents,
is that someone loved Uncle Ilyas enough to follow him
to certain death in a concentration camp in order to
keep him company.